RESEARCH ARTICLE

NEUROSCIENCE

OPEN ACCESS

Full interhemispheric integration sustained by a fraction of
posterior callosal fibers
Tyler Santandera,b,1 ID , Selin Bekirb , Theresa Paulc , Jessica M. Simonsona,b , Valerie M. Wiemerc , Henri Etel Skinnerb , Johanna L. Hopfd , Anna Radad ,
Friedrich G. Woermannd,e , Thilo Kalbhennd,f ID , Barry Giesbrechta,b ID , Christian G. Biend , Olaf Spornsg , Michael S. Gazzanigab,1 ID , Lukas J. Volzc,2 ID ,
and Michael B. Millera,b,2
Affiliations are included on p. 9.
Contributed by Michael S. Gazzaniga; received July 25, 2025; accepted September 12, 2025; reviewed by Steven A. Hillyard and Christof Koch

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 46.229.243.203 on October 7, 2026 from IP address 46.229.243.203.

The dynamic integration of the lateralized and specialized capacities of the two
cerebral hemispheres constitutes a hallmark feature of human brain function. This
interhemispheric exchange of information critically depends upon the corpus callosum.
Classical anatomical descriptions of callosal organization outline a topographic gradient
from front to back, such that specific transcallosal fibers support distinct aspects
of integrated brain function. Here, we present a challenge to this conventional
model. Using neuroimaging data obtained from a new cohort of adult corpus
callosotomy patients, we leverage modern network neuroscience techniques to show
that full interhemispheric integration can be achieved via a small proportion of
posterior callosal fibers. Partial callosotomy patients with spared callosal fibers retained
widespread patterns of interhemispheric functional connectivity and showed no
signs of behavioral disconnection, even with only 1 cm of the splenium intact.
Conversely, only complete callosotomy patients demonstrated sweeping disruptions of
interhemispheric network architectures, aligning with disconnection syndromes longthought to reflect diminished information propagation and communication across the
brain. These findings motivate an evolving mechanistic understanding of synchronized
interhemispheric neural activity for large-scale human brain function and behavior.
resting-state | functional connectivity | split-brain | brain networks | corpus callosum

In recent decades, network neuroscience has emerged as a powerful analysis framework
for modeling functional interactions between remote neural systems. A foundational
assumption of this approach is that anatomical links between brain regions constrain
neuronal dynamics and support the emergence of large-scale functional networks, which
in turn enable the efficient integration of perceptual, motor, and higher-order cognitive
information necessary for human behavior (1–6). The corpus callosum (CC) is thought
to be the central conduit through which specialized processing nodes in each cerebral
hemisphere coordinate and synchronize function, with 200 to 250 million axons affording
direct, long-range communication across the brain. Classical topographic models of
CC projections have revealed a well-defined anterior-to-posterior anatomical gradient,
corresponding to the spatial organization of canonical brain networks supporting various
sensorimotor and cognitive functions (7, 8). One consequence of this view is the
prediction that damage to the CC should result in drastic functional disconnections
between hemispheres—with disruptions following the localization of lesioned fibers
along the aforementioned anatomical gradient.
Split-brain patients, in whom the CC has been severed in an effort to treat medically
intractable epilepsy, offer a powerful means of testing this core conceit of structure–
function correspondence. However, neural data on these patients remain scarce—
callosotomy was largely discontinued around the turn of the 21st century, coinciding with
the rise of network neuroscience. Extant data largely stem from anesthetized pediatric
patients (9–12). Taken together, these studies support the hypothesis that full versus
partial callosotomy confer differential effects with respect to the location and extent of
functional disconnections. At the same time, however, they have provided contradictory
findings regarding recovery of function postoperatively (9, 11, 12), and various other
methodological factors obfuscate more straightforward interpretations. Thus, to date, it
remains unknown how severing the largest fiber bundle of the human brain affects the
topological organization and intrinsic dynamics of large-scale functional networks.
To address this fundamental question, we present an investigation aimed at
characterizing the impacts of full and partial callosotomy on the adult human brain using

PNAS

2025

Vol. 122

No. 43

e2520190122

Significance
Network neuroscience is
predicated on the assumption
that structural brain connectivity
enables long-range
communication between
specialized information
processing systems, known as
functional networks. The corpus
callosum plays a central role in
orchestrating activity between the
left and right hemispheres,
supporting a unified cognitive
experience of the world. Here, we
assessed the consequences of
surgically severing that
connection in the adult human
brain. We found that complete
transection of the corpus
callosum largely isolated
functional networks to within
each hemisphere, while networks
in patients who underwent a
partial transection remained
completely integrated—even if
the vast majority was severed.
This contradicts classical views on
structure-function
correspondence and suggests the
essential mechanisms for
interhemispheric integration are
more adaptable than previously
imagined.

Copyright © 2025 the Author(s). Published by PNAS.
This open access article is distributed under Creative
Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives
License 4.0 (CC BY-NC-ND).
1 To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email:

tsantander@ucsb.edu or mgazzaniga@ucsb.edu.
2 L.J.V. and M.B.M contributed equally to this work.

This article contains supporting information online
at https://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.
2520190122/-/DCSupplemental.
Published October 21, 2025.

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2520190122

1 of 10

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 46.229.243.203 on October 7, 2026 from IP address 46.229.243.203.

Fig. 1. Patient anatomical scans. Postoperative T1 - and diffusion-weighted MRI scans collected for all six patients at time of testing. White arrows/ellipses for
patients EM and BT highlight intact CC (i.e., partial splits). The remaining four patients were fully sectioned. Note that a series of clinical observations suggested
behavioral disconnection syndromes in all full splits, but not in partial splits.

multiple network neuroscience methods. We hypothesized that
full callosotomy would wholly disrupt functional synchrony
across the cerebral hemispheres, while the spatial distribution of
functional disconnections following partial callosotomy would
unveil the anatomical gradient of the CC. As predicted, we
found that complete sectioning of the CC broadly obliterated
both typical interhemispheric network topologies and dynamic
patterns of interhemispheric temporal synchrony. More strikingly, however, we also found that a small proportion of intact
posterior CC fibers (a case of partial callosotomy) was sufficient
to support widespread interhemispheric coupling. These findings
challenge our conventional understanding of the CC’s functional
topography and shed light on the critical mechanisms for
interhemispheric information integration.

This contradicts classical models of callosal organization and
function, which posit specific deficits depending upon which
portions of the CC were severed. The splenium, for example, is
commonly believed to integrate visual information alone (17, 18).
However, BT was also capable of transferring tactile information,
as shown when asked to verbally name objects placed in his
left hand that he could not see (requiring information to be
sent from the nonspeaking right hemisphere to the speaking
left hemisphere). Full splits were incapable of performing this
transfer, and indeed for BT, such successful interhemispheric
communication was evident across a range of tasks spanning
various cognitive domains and sensorimotor modalities (16).
Consequently, a small proportion of posterior callosal fibers may
be sufficient to support extensive information integration across
large-scale interhemispheric brain networks.

Results

Interhemispheric Functional Connectivity after Callosotomy.

Six adult callosotomy patients (5 men, 1 woman; aged 19 to 60;
all right-handed; Fig. 1 and Table 1) were tested postoperatively
at the Bethel Epilepsy Center (Bielefeld, Germany). The time
between surgery and testing varied between one and six years
(Table 1). In two patients (EM and BT), surgery did not result
in a complete callosal transection; they are hereafter referred to
as “partial splits”. In patient EM, the surgery was stopped after
sectioning the anterior CC (roughly, ∼38% of the CC’s crosssectional area in the mid-sagittal plane); patient BT was spared
approximately 1 cm of splenium (losing ∼90% of the CC’s
cross-sectional area). The remaining four patients (HY, DT, TJ,
and LJ) were completely sectioned and are hereafter referred to
as “full splits”. All patients have intact anterior and posterior
commissures regardless of the extent of the callosal section.
Callosotomy is not commonly associated with postoperative
neuropsychiatric or neurological disorders. Rather, split-brain
patients often demonstrate disconnection syndromes, such that
they appear to have two hemispheres operating independently,
unable to communicate information from one half of the
brain to the other (13–15). Here, behavioral disconnection
syndromes were clinically observed using simple, lateralized
bedside testing protocols. Comprehensive descriptions of these
tests are described elsewhere (16). In brief, all four complete
callosotomy patients clearly indicated behavioral disconnections.
Partial splits, in contrast, did not show any signs of disconnection
syndromes—including, remarkably, patient BT (with a mere
1 cm of splenium).

2 of 10

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2520190122

All patients underwent resting-state functional MRI without sedation, affording whole-brain analyses of resting-state functional
connectivity (FC) and quantification of interhemispheric FC
(IFC). To benchmark patients against “neurotypical” patterns
of IFC, we used data from the Human Connectome Project
100 Unrelated Subjects (HCP100) cohort. All HCP100 subjects
and callosotomy patients underwent an identical preprocessing
pipeline, including conservative corrections for mitigating head
motion artifacts (19, 20) (see SI Appendix, Fig. S1 for a
quantitative summary of patient head motion). Whole-brain FC
in the range of 0.01 to 0.08 Hz was assessed by parcellating
the brain into 400 cortical regions and 32 subcortical regions
(according to the Schaefer (21, 22) and Tian (23) atlases,
respectively; Fig. 2A) and correlating all pairs of regional time
series (Fig. 2 B and C).

Table 1.
Patient
EM
BT
HY
DT
TJ
LJ

General overview of callosotomy patients
Age
(surgery)

Age
(testing)

Sex

Extent

Disconnection
syndrome

17
22
21
15
49
57

19
28
22
20
52
60

M
M
M
M
F
M

Partial
Partial
Full
Full
Full
Full

Absent
Absent
Present
Present
Present
Present

pnas.org

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 46.229.243.203 on October 7, 2026 from IP address 46.229.243.203.

All full splits demonstrated marked reductions in IFC relative
to both neurotypical controls and partial splits (Fig. 2 B and
C). Spatial patterns of intrahemispheric FC, by contrast, were
generally better-matched to controls (SI Appendix, Fig. S2),
suggesting that callosotomy primarily impaired interhemispheric
functional coupling with full splits suffering the greatest disruptions. Curiously, however, while gross IFC was reduced in
full splits, inspection of individual FC matrices suggested that
visual network connectivity was partially preserved (Fig. 2C).
This may be due to synchronized perceptual inputs (scans were
acquired with eyes open), driving apparent IFC despite the lack
of transcallosal connectivity between visual regions and evidence
for behavioral disconnections.
We therefore sought to assess differences in the magnitude of
IFC between functional homologues to determine whether any
preserved IFC was unique to sensory systems. Here, we computed
a series of network laterality indices, where a value of zero
indicates a perfect balance between inter- and intrahemispheric
FC, and values closer to −1 or +1 indicate relatively more interor intrahemispheric FC, respectively (see Materials and Methods,
Eq. 1). Note that we focus here on the distribution of positively
coupled regions (anticorrelated regions are shown in SI Appendix,
Fig. S3).
Consistent with observed behavioral disconnections, all full
splits demonstrated more lateralized patterns of FC relative to
healthy controls and partial splits, who typically fell within the
control distributions (Fig. 3). This was evident in both higherorder, transmodal systems (e.g., the default mode and dorsal
attention networks) and in somatosensory networks (with the
exception of patient TJ, who fell within the upper tail of the
control distribution in the somatomotor network). Patient EM
was more lateralized across frontoparietal control nodes, which
include a number of regions likely to be structurally disconnected
given the extent of their callosotomy; however, BT generally
showed degrees of network bilaterality equivalent to healthy
adults, despite having a mere fraction of splenium intact. Finally,
full splits appeared to show conserved bilateral FC across limbic
regions like the orbitofrontal cortex and temporal poles, which are
known to be structurally coupled through the preserved anterior
commissure as well as the CC (24–26). In sum, these results
highlight the dependence of interhemispheric networks on CC
connectivity—yet, neurotypical levels of functional integration
were possible even when only the splenium was left intact.
Lateralized Expressions of Functional Modules. To further elu-

cidate whole-brain differences in functional network topology
(agnostic to any a priori assignment of individual brain regions to
canonical functional systems) we employed data-driven community detection techniques to cluster whole-brain patterns of FC
into functional modules (Fig. 4). The modular organization of
both structural and functional brain networks is thought to enable
specialized information processing while retaining the ability
to efficiently integrate information between disparate neural
systems (27, 28). Thus, we hypothesized that the breakdown of
IFC in full splits would produce lateralized network topologies,
predominantly self-organized within one hemisphere or the
other.
Here, we computed laterality indices for the estimated partitions according to prior work (29): where a value of zero,
for example, indicates that all functional modules are perfectly
bilateral (i.e., the number of brain regions constituting each
community are equally balanced between the left and right
hemispheres), and values closer to one indicate progressively

PNAS

2025

Vol. 122

No. 43

e2520190122

more lateralized topologies. Importantly, we note that modularity
maximization is sensitive to spatial scale, subject to a resolution
parameter, 𝛾 (30). We describe results using a “default” 𝛾 = 1
below but provide further consideration of these issues in
Materials and Methods and SI Appendix, Fig. S4.
As predicted, we observed much greater degrees of modular laterality in all full splits (Fig. 5). Communities with bihemispheric
representations primarily spanned visual and somatomotor
regions—reflecting a mechanism through which synchronized,
external sensory inputs can drive apparent functional integration.
With respect to partial splits, patient EM with the most CC
showed bilateral patterns of network organization mirroring
neurotypical controls. Patient BT also fell within the control
distribution of laterality but showed a strikingly different pattern
of modular topology (Fig. 4). Here, functional communities
appeared to dissociate along the Sylvian fissure, with dorsal
modules and ventral modules spanning the anteroposterior axis
of the brain. This individual had the longest gap between surgery
and testing (∼6 y), which may have allowed for widespread
network reorganization affording optimal utilization of the
minimal callosal fibers left intact. These findings underscore the
importance of transcallosal connections for the emergence of
coherent interhemispheric systems, while further highlighting a
role for sensory inputs enabling apparent preservation of bilateral
sensorimotor modules.
Interhemispheric Synchrony in Network Dynamics. The mod-

ular organization of the brain plays a critical role in governing
large-scale functional dynamics, such that structural architectures
orchestrate widespread cofluctuations in whole-brain activity
over time (31). Such patterns of coordinated network dynamics
have recently been elucidated using edge time series (ETS): In
brief, the ETS approach constitutes a temporal unwrapping
of the zero-order Pearson correlation between any given pair
of brain regions (i.e., an “edge” in classical graph theoretic
descriptions of brain networks), capturing moment-to-moment
changes in the extent to which regional pairs cofluctuate in
activity (32). Taking the root-sum-of-squares (RSS) across all
ETS at each timepoint yields summary estimates of multivariate
cofluctuations in functional network dynamics over the course
of a scan (33) (Fig. 6A).
Here, we sought to test the hypothesis that structural connectivity via the CC is necessary for large-scale coordination of
function. To that end, we separated edges within the left and right
hemispheres and derived an RSS time course for each. We then
computed correlations between left and right RSS to assess the
degree to which dynamic cofluctuations in brain function were
synchronized across hemispheres. Among neurotypical controls,
we observed tight temporal coupling between left and right hemisphere dynamics (Median Spearman r = 0.82, MAD = 0.08). In
contrast, all four full splits demonstrated significant reductions in
interhemispheric synchrony, suggesting that network dynamics
were more functionally independent (Fig. 6B; see SI Appendix,
Fig. S5 for individual networks). This is consistent with the
overall attenuation of interhemispheric FC and further indicates
that brief moments of high-amplitude cofluctuations (which
normally encompass regions in both hemispheres and are thought
to be structurally mediated (31)) occur separately in each.
Notably, both patients EM and BT (partial splits) fell within
the standard range of the HCP subjects. These results therefore
strongly suggest a mechanistic role for CC structural connections
in supporting widespread synchronization of interhemispheric
network dynamics. This may even be achieved with a mere

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2520190122

3 of 10

A

B

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 46.229.243.203 on October 7, 2026 from IP address 46.229.243.203.

C

Fig. 2. Interhemispheric functional connectivity is broadly diminished in full (but not partial) splits. (A) Whole-brain functional parcellation composed of seven
canonical resting-state networks (21, 22) and subcortical nodes (23). (B) A standard reference for neurotypical whole-brain functional connectivity (FC), given
as the median over HCP100 subjects. FC was estimated by correlating low-frequency brain activity (0.01 to 0.08 Hz) between all pairs of regions in (A). The large
boxes outlining the Upper Left and Lower Right quadrants denote intrahemispheric FC; the Upper Right and Lower Left quadrants thus capture interhemispheric FC
(IFC). Note that the main diagonal (representing self-connections) was blanked as these are irrelevant for subsequent analyses. (C) Whole-brain FC estimates for
each callosotomy patient, thresholded at P < 0.001 (uncorrected for multiple comparisons). Typical patterns of IFC were largely abolished in full splits (HY, DT,
TJ, LJ), while partial splits (EM, BT) were more similar to healthy controls. Abbreviations: SomMot, SomatoMotor Network; DorsAttn, Dorsal Attention Network;
SalVentAttn, Salience/Ventral Attention Network; LH, Left Hemisphere; and RH, Right Hemisphere.

fraction of intact fibers through the splenium and thus might
be largely independent of the presence of direct cortico-cortical
connections.
Discussion
We observed distinct disruptions of interhemispheric functional
connectivity following complete versus partial transection of
the corpus callosum. Full splits demonstrated more lateralized
network topologies and desynchronized network dynamics,

4 of 10

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2520190122

aligning with classical behavioral disconnection syndromes.
Given that all patients had intact anterior and posterior commissures (along with other subcortical routes of interhemispheric
communication), these findings underscore the notion that
transcallosal connections are the essential pathways through
which large-scale interhemispheric functional networks emerge.
Contrary to our expectations, however, interhemispheric functional coupling among partial splits remained intact. These
patients also showed no signs of behavioral disconnection, even
when the vast majority of the callosum was severed (16). Thus,

pnas.org

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 46.229.243.203 on October 7, 2026 from IP address 46.229.243.203.

Fig. 3. Full callosotomy is associated with more lateralized functional connectivity. Network laterality indices are shown across seven canonical resting-state
systems (21, 22) and subcortical regions (23). Values closer to zero indicate an equal balance between intra- and interhemispheric FC, while values closer to one
indicate more intrahemispheric FC relative to interhemispheric FC. Note that each subplot captures a unique range of values, given differences in variability
observed across neurotypical adults (colored distributions), patients, and networks. Full splits generally demonstrated more strongly lateralized FC compared
to partials, who fell within the control distributions. Point intervals for each control distribution give the HCP100 median (black dot) and the 80 to 95% quantiles
around the median (thick black lines and thin black lines, respectively). Abbreviations: SomMot, SomatoMotor Network; DorsAttn, Dorsal Attention Network;
SalVentAttn, Salience/Ventral Attention Network.

a fraction of callosal fibers in the splenium may be sufficient to
orchestrate interhemispheric functional synchrony and integrate
behavior. This poses a stark challenge to our classical topographic
models of callosal connectivity and function, motivating an evolving view of interhemispheric structure-function relationships:
namely, that robust interhemispheric synchrony and information
transfer can be achieved via polysynaptic connectivity through a
relatively small proportion of posterior transcallosal connections,
rather than direct structural connectivity between functional
homologues.
Complete Callosotomy and Structure–Function Relationships.

Split-brain patients present a unique opportunity to draw causal
inferences regarding the role of transcallosal structural connections and the extent to which interhemispheric functional synchrony depends upon such connections. Previous investigations
of pediatric callosotomy patients have provided an initial perspective on this question (9–12). However, these patients often suffer
from severe cognitive and developmental deficits, requiring scans
to be completed under sedation—which reduces dynamical complexity in brain activity and produces functional connectomes
more rigidly tied to direct anatomical pathways (34). It is further
known that functional and structural brain networks undergo

PNAS

2025

Vol. 122

No. 43

e2520190122

profound developmental changes early in life (35–38). In other
words, neural plasticity in these young individuals may still
afford the long-term establishment of alternate interhemispheric
pathways (perhaps akin to callosal agenesis patients (39)), and
indeed, it is well documented that disconnection syndromes in
pediatric patients resolve over time (40, 41). This likely accounts
for differential reports of recovery in interhemispheric FC among
these individuals (9, 11, 12).
The adult brain also retains neuroplastic potential (42).
However, given the enormity of the structural disconnection,
adult callosotomy patients may lack the capacity to adapt their
functional architectures in such a way that allows complete
recovery of communication between the two hemispheres.
Our results clearly underscore this hypothesis. Whole-brain
patterns of FC appeared highly lateralized, both with respect to
canonical network definitions (Figs. 2 and 3) and the topological
organization of functional modules (Figs. 4 and 5). Furthermore,
we observed considerable reductions in the extent to which
multivariate cofluctuations in activity were synchronized between
hemispheres (Fig. 6), underscoring a role for the CC in orchestrating whole-brain network dynamics. Importantly, however,
there were some exceptions to these effects, which follow
anatomical predictions. Limbic and subcortical regions—the

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2520190122

5 of 10

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 46.229.243.203 on October 7, 2026 from IP address 46.229.243.203.

Fig. 4. Modular decomposition of whole-brain functional connectivity. Spatial maps of optimal, consensus community assignments derived via datadriven modularity maximization are shown at a default level of resolution
(𝛾 = 1). Regional coloring thus indicates the assignment to a given functional
module (unrelated to the “canonical” coloring of regions/networks in Fig. 2A).
Because this decomposition is dependent upon individual-specific patterns
of FC, individual patients may exhibit different numbers/organizations of
modules, and therefore not all colors appear for all patients. Full splits
generally exhibited more lateralized clustering of regions into modules
relative to partial splits and healthy adult controls (see Fig. 5 for quantification
of module laterality).

in the range of neurotypical controls (Figs. 2–6). This was
even observed for patient BT, in whom only 1 cm of posterior
callosal fibers (roughly ∼10% of the CC’s cross-sectional area)
were spared. It has become increasingly evident that structure–
function relationships are highly complex and generally do not
reflect simple, one-to-one interactions between directly coupled
areas (51–53). Still, these remarkable results imply that the
functional topography of the CC may be much more flexible
than previously imagined. In particular, there may be a critical
threshold at which full functional integration can be sustained
given a sufficient proportion of intact fibers—even if the vast
majority of the callosum has been severed.
An intriguing extension of this hypothesis is that the location
of the spared callosal fibers may be critical. Previous cytological
work has shown that anterior portions of the CC are primarily
populated by thin fibers, while fibers in the tail locally vary in
diameter (54–56). Such differences in fiber size and myelination
along the CC have been associated with differences in conduction
velocity (56) and, when considered alongside the topographic
organization of the CC, may account for the “fast” versus
“slow” action of primary sensorimotor and association cortices,
respectively. Spared posterior fibers as in BT could therefore be
more beneficial than spared anterior fibers. However, from a sheer
bandwidth perspective, it is difficult to imagine how such a small
proportion of fibers could account for widespread integration of
function and cognitive processing.
It appears likely that functional systems in BT dramatically
reorganized in the six years following surgery. In brains that
develop normally with the support of the CC, multisensory
integration zones in the parietal cortex may serve as interhemispheric hubs (57, 58). By taking advantage of spared posterior
callosal pathways connecting these regions, the processing of
various intrahemispheric brain regions can still be integrated

former of which are known to be connected through the anterior
commissure (AC) as well as the CC (24–26)—showed conserved
bilateral FC (Fig. 3). Nevertheless, noncallosal pathways were
insufficient to support widespread interhemispheric synchrony,
contrary to previous proposals both in humans (43–45) and
nonhuman primates (where AC fibers are sufficient to sustain
interhemispheric FC) (46). Finally, visual and sensorimotor areas
also appeared to remain somewhat integrated. We cannot fully
discount the possibility that subcortical information transfer
contributed to this preserved synchrony; however, an alternative
hypothesis may lie in the fact that visual and somatosensory inputs
to each hemisphere were synchronized during the resting-state
scan—producing apparent functional coherence despite observed
behavioral disconnections.
Preserved Interhemispheric Integration in Partial Splits. While
our observations in full splits clearly emphasize the importance
of CC connectivity in orchestrating interhemispheric synchrony,
partial splits revealed something much more surprising. We
predicted that partial splits would show specific deficits in
interhemispheric FC along an anterior-to-posterior gradient
localized to the extent of the callosal transection, following
both previous characterizations of CC topography (7, 8) and
prior behavioral studies (47–50). However, both partial splits
consistently demonstrated levels of interhemispheric integration

6 of 10

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2520190122

Fig. 5. Functional modules are more strongly lateralized in full splits. The
modular laterality index quantifies the extent to which functional communities exhibit bihemispheric representations (values closer to zero) or are
restricted to one hemisphere or the other (values closer to one). At a default
level of resolution (𝛾 = 1), partial splits demonstrated bilateral network
topologies similar to healthy controls, whereas full splits were consistently
more lateralized. Point intervals under the control distribution give the
HCP100 median (black dot) and the 80 to 95% quantiles around the median
(thick black lines and thin black lines, respectively).

pnas.org

A

B

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 46.229.243.203 on October 7, 2026 from IP address 46.229.243.203.

Fig. 6. Large-scale functional network dynamics are desynchronized in full splits. (A) An illustration of edge time series (ETS) in the left and right hemispheres
for patient BT (a partial split with 1 cm of intact splenium) and patient TJ (a full split). Each row of an ETS matrix denotes an individual pair of cofluctuating
brain regions (i.e., an “edge”), while columns capture individual image volumes over time. By taking the root-sum-of-squares (RSS) across all edges at each
timepoint (i.e., within each column), we derived summary estimates of the total amplitude of cofluctuating brain activity within each hemisphere. Note the
bursty, high-amplitude cofluctuations in each hemisphere that often coincide in time for BT, but not in TJ. (B) All four full splits exhibited reduced temporal
synchrony (i.e., temporal correlations) between left/right hemisphere RSS time courses. Partial splits, by contrast, fell within the range of healthy adult controls.
Point intervals under the control distribution give the HCP100 median (black dot) and the 80 to 95% quantiles around the median (thick black lines and thin
black lines, respectively). Abbreviations: LH, Left Hemisphere; RH, Right Hemisphere.

and exchanged along polysynaptic routes running between
hemispheres. The striking differences in functional network
topology observed in BT, with large modules spanning the
anterior–posterior axis of the brain (Fig. 4), are one potential
consequence of this reorganization, reflecting greater functional
dependencies between frontal and posterior areas affording more
optimal usage of the spared splenial fibers. The fundamental
importance of these posterior interhemispheric connections also
aligns with and may further inform neuroscientific theories of
consciousness (59, 60). While our results are not suited to
evaluate or endorse any particular theory, it is nevertheless curious
that the temporal-parietal-occipital “hot zone” of regions recently
proposed to maximize the singular “here-and-now” qualia of
consciousness (59, 61) are likely dependent (in part) upon CC
connections through the splenium. This may explain why BT
maintains an integrated conscious experience while full splits
demonstrate interhemispheric disintegration (16).
Limitations. We acknowledge the small number of patients

included in this study, each of whom have limited postoperative
data. While previous pediatric studies have recruited larger
samples, the availability of patients who underwent callosotomy
in adulthood is extremely scarce. It is often difficult to draw
robust and reliable statistical inferences from neuroimaging
data acquired on such small samples. However, the marked
differences observed between full splits and healthy controls
suggest that we are not parsing trivial effects on the scale of
traditional neuroimaging—rather, they reflect outcomes drawn
from fundamentally unique sampling distributions. Furthermore, relative to other lesion studies (often hampered by
variability in spatial localization/extent), callosotomy is a highly
selective intervention. By severing a single white matter structure
in the brain without any damage to gray matter, callosotomy

PNAS

2025

Vol. 122

No. 43

e2520190122

may afford more homogeneous outcomes. It will be critical for
future studies to include larger samples with more imaging data to
better characterize the extent of neural variability in callosotomy
patients, especially as network architectures reorganize over
time.
Conclusion. Following more than a half-century of behavioral

neuroscience, split-brain patients continue to provide startling
insights into the fundamental nature of the human brain.
The rise of network neuroscience has further transformed our
understanding of large-scale brain systems, tracing the pathways
relating brain structure to function and behavior. Our findings
reveal a unique type of criticality in brain function—such that
a small proportion of posterior callosal fibers may be sufficient
to support the integration of interhemispheric functional brain
networks and unified cognitive processing. It has long been
celebrated that the human brain is a remarkably adaptable
complex system. These findings challenge us to rethink our
conventional assumptions about structure–function relationships
and the means through which the brain enables the mind.
Materials and Methods
Patient Recruitment. Six adult callosotomy patients (5 men, 1 woman; aged

19 to 60; all right-handed; Fig. 1 and Table 1) were recruited during routine
postoperative follow-up visits to the Bethel Epilepsy Center (Bielefeld, Germany).
The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the University of Münster,
Germany (2021-523-f-S). The patients or their legal representatives provided
written informed consent.
Callosotomy Procedure. Callosotomies were performed with the assistance of

intraoperative neuronavigation, with patients in a supine position and the head
inclined by roughly 30◦ (fixed in the Mayfield clamp). A straight skin incision

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2520190122

7 of 10

was made running slightly next to the midline on the nonlanguage dominant
hemisphere. Craniotomy was then performed by making one drill hole in the
midline at approximately the level of the precentral sulcus. A bone flap was
sawn out with an outline of 3 cm × 5 cm. The dura was incised longitudinally
and then opened with two wings under microneurosurgical conditions—access
to the interhemispheric fissure was successively created while preserving the
cortical bridging veins. Next, using a self-retaining retractor to carefully shift the
frontal lobe, the level of the corpus callosum was gradually exposed under sharp
dissection with microscissors.
Dissection is often made considerably more difficult by the course of the
pericallosal arteries, which run parallel to the corpus callosum but are often
tightly intertwined and twisted in the interhemispheric fissure. In cases where
the risk of vascular damage is too great, the surgery may be halted short of a
full disconnection (resulting in partial splits). However, under most conditions,
the interhemispheric fissure may be opened along the entire length of the
knee of the corpus callosum. The corpus callosum was then perforated into the
lateral ventricle of the ipsilateral hemisphere. Next, following the pericallosal
artery and the anterior cerebral artery down to the frontal base, the knee of the
callosum was split in the midline, continuing backward to about the level of
the foramen of Monroi. From this point, it is critical to protect the fornix of the
language-dominant hemisphere: To mitigate the risk of postoperative functional
impairment, we carefully ensure that the self-retaining retractor is not placed on
the precentral gyrus within the interhemispheric fissure. The disconnection can
now be carried out completely into the splenium—the severing of the splenium
was performed subpially to protect all the cisternal vessels. Extensive hemostasis
is not usually necessary, and thus, a ventricular drainage is not used. To conclude,
the dura mater was closed and the bone flap reinserted and fixed with titanium
plates and screws. Finally, a subgaleal drainage was inserted and the skin closed
in two layers.

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 46.229.243.203 on October 7, 2026 from IP address 46.229.243.203.

Healthy Adult Controls. We

used open-access data from the Human
Connectome Project 100 Unrelated Subjects (HCP100) cohort (46 men, 54
women; MAge = 29.11, SD = 3.68) as a robust benchmark for various
network features estimated in callosotomy patients. Participant recruitment
and imaging procedures have previously been detailed elsewhere (62, 63).
In brief, data were collected over two sessions on a custom 3T Siemens
Skyra with a 32-channel head coil. T1 -weighted structural scans were acquired
using a 3D magnetization prepared rapid gradient echo (MPRAGE) sequence
(TR = 2,400 ms, TE = 2.14 ms, TI = 1,000 ms, flip angle = 8◦ , voxel size =
0.7 mm3 ). Resting-state fMRI was collected with eyes open over four 14.5-min
scans, using a multiband echo-planar imaging (EPI) sequence sensitive to the
blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) contrast (TR = 720 ms, TE = 33.1 ms,
flip angle = 52◦ , voxel size = 2 mm3 , multiband factor = 8). All participants
gave written informed consent for a protocol approved by the Washington
University Institutional Review Board. All imaging data were downloaded in
their raw (unprocessed) state.
Patient Neuroimaging Procedures. Patient data were collected on a 3T

Siemens Vida at the Bethel Epilepsy Center using a 32-channel head coil.
T1 -weighted structural scans were acquired using a 3D MPRAGE sequence
(TR = 1,900 ms, TE = 2.47 ms, TI = 900 ms, flip angle = 8◦ , voxel size =
0.8 mm3 ). Resting-state fMRI was collected with eyes open using a single-shot
EPI sequence sensitive to the BOLD contrast (TR = 2,000 ms, TE = 30 ms, flip
angle = 75◦ , voxel size = 3 × 3 × 3.30 mm, iPAT/GRAPPA factor = 2).
We note that each patient varied somewhat in the amount of resting-state
data obtained (from 8 to 20 min total) due to differences in clinical scheduling
and other imaging protocols not relevant to the current analysis. This information
is detailed in SI Appendix, Fig. S1.
fMRI Preprocessing. All data (from both patients and healthy controls) were

run through a unified preprocessing pipeline. Initial preprocessing relied
on functions from the Statistical Parametric Mapping 12 software (SPM12,
Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, London) in Matlab and Advanced
Normalization Tools (ANTs) (64). Resting-state fMRI data were realigned and
unwarped to correct for head motion and motion × susceptibility artifact

8 of 10

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2520190122

as well as slice-time corrected. Anatomical images were denoised (ANTs’
DenoiseImage with a spatially adaptive Gaussian filter) and submitted to
ANTs’ cortical thickness pipeline, which includes N4 bias field correction
and high-quality image segmentation and brain extraction (65). For some
patients, the brain extraction mask included extracerebral components: This
was corrected by manually eroding the extraction mask and reapplying it to
the anatomical scan when necessary. Image coregistration parameters were
subsequently estimated between an N3 bias-corrected mean BOLD reference
and the skull-stripped T1 image via antsRegistration (including both linear and
nonlinear transformations to minimize residual signal deformations, cf. “SyN
distortion correction” as implemented by the widely used fMRIPrep and QSIPrep
pipelines).
Subsequent spatial normalization to a standard stereotaxic space presented a
nontrivial problem for patient data. In the absence of a corpus callosum, generic
registration routines (with both linear and nonlinear stages) will frequently pull
structures such as the cingulate gyrus into the space occupied by the CC in the
MNI template image, which misaligns brain regions relative to their location
in our functional parcellation. We mitigated this problem in two ways. First,
we implemented cost-function masking during the nonlinear step to minimize
the influence of callosal regions that were transected by the surgery: These
masks were specified in the fixed image space (i.e., the MNI152NLin6Asym
template, as provided by the FMRIB Software Library, FSL) (66, 67) because we
lacked preoperative data for each patient, and CC segments were defined by the
JHU-DTI white matter atlas (68, 69) (also provided in FSL). For patient EM, the
genu was masked out; for patient BT, all but the splenium was masked out; and
for all full splits, the entire cross-section of the callosum was masked out. Second,
in addition to these masks, we specified a series of registration metric objectives
at the nonlinear step. As is typical for antsRegistration, we estimated similarity
between the MNI template and T1 images using both ANTs’ neighborhood crosscorrelation and Mattes mutual information similarity metrics. We also provided
smoothed segmentation posteriors derived from the ANTs cortical thickness
pipeline (six in total: white matter, cortical gray matter, CSF, deep/subcortical
gray matter, brainstem, and cerebellum) and estimated similarity between the
MNI template segments and patient segments using a mean-squares objective,
with cortical white matter and CSF segments downweighted in importance
relative to the other four segments (by a factor of one third). Thus, the nonlinear
step was composed of eight similarity metrics. The transformation was estimated
using BSplineSyN to allow for smoother deformations without sacrificing
accuracy.
Ultimately, we concatenated and applied the estimated coregistration and
spatial normalization parameters to all fMRI data in a single interpolation
via antsApplyTransforms, resampled into 2 mm3 isotropic voxels. Registration
quality was visually assessed to ensure appropriate mapping to MNI space.
Functional images were then smoothed using a 3D Gaussian kernel with
FWHM = 5 mm3 . Prior to functional connectivity estimation, several additional
preprocessing steps were performed using in-house Matlab code: This included
global signal scaling (median = 1,000), linear detrending, and nuisance
regression. The nuisance regression model followed a “36-parameter” (36P)
approach including the six motion regressors from realignment, the first
eigenvariate of white matter signal, the first eigenvariate of CSF signal, and
mean global signal—along with their squares, their first derivatives (via backward
differentiation), and the squares of the derivatives. All nuisance regressors were
detrended to match the BOLD data. We further augmented the design matrix
of the nuisance model with a series of binary spike regressors: one for each
image volume where the relative framewise displacement in head motion
(accounting for both translation and rotation) was ≥0.50 mm. This “36P +
spike regression” model has importantly been shown to outperform alternative
confound regression strategies (e.g., motion scrubbing and ICA-based methods)
and provide the best control for motion artifact in functional connectivity
analyses (19, 20). Patients generally showed no more head motion than HCP
subjects; for reference, we provide a summary of head motion parameters and
the frequency of motion spikes for each patient in SI Appendix, Fig. S1.
Functional Connectivity Estimation and Network Laterality. Functional

network nodes were defined by parcellating the brain into 400 cortical regions
and 32 subcortical regions, according to the Schaefer (22) and Tian (23) atlases,

pnas.org

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 46.229.243.203 on October 7, 2026 from IP address 46.229.243.203.

respectively. We extracted a summary time course from each parcel by taking
the first eigenvariate over time (70). These regional time series were bandpassfiltered to the range of 0.01 to 0.08 Hz. We then constructed 432 × 432 FC
matrices by estimating the zero-order Pearson correlation between all pairs
of regional time series. For both HCP100 subjects and callosotomy patients
with more than one resting-state scan, runs were concatenated prior to FC
estimation.
We sought to quantify differences in interhemispheric functional connectivity
(IFC) between callosotomy patients and healthy controls from a number of
network neuroscience perspectives. Pursuant to this, we began with an initial,
breadth-first assessment of IFC within each of the seven canonical restingstate networks (21) defined by our cortical parcellation, as well as regions
spanning the subcortex. Similarly to studies of functional lateralization in
task-based fMRI, we derived a network laterality index as a simple means
of summarizing and quantifying the relative magnitude of IFC as compared to
the magnitude of intrahemispheric FC. Each FC matrix was first thresholded
at an uncorrected level of P < 0.001 to avoid overly conservative and highly
nonlinear effects of multiple comparisons correction on the distribution of edge
weights, while simultaneously minimizing the influence of weak (potentially
spurious) connections. We then Fisher-Z transformed the thresholded FC
matrices and, for each individual and for each network, estimated a laterality
index, LI, as
P
P
P
( zFCIntraLH + zFCIntraRH ) − zFCInter
P
P
[1]
LI = P
zFCIntraLH + zFCIntraRH + zFCInter
Intrahemispheric connections within the left and right hemispheres are
necessarily summed in the numerator given that there are, by definition, twice
as many interhemispheric connections as each hemisphere alone. The result is a
ratio on the interval of [−1, +1] that captures the extent to which each canonical
resting-state network is predominantly connected intra- or interhemispherically:
In the limit, a value of −1 would suggest that there is no intrahemispheric FC and
the network is solely composed of interhemispheric connections, while a value
of +1 would indicate the reverse. A value of 0 therefore represents a network
that is perfectly balanced in the magnitude of intra- versus interhemispheric
connections. Note that the results presented in Fig. 3 are with respect to
positively correlated edges only; we provide a comparison of anticorrelated
edge lateralization in SI Appendix, Fig. S3.
Community Detection and Modularity. While the above approach is useful
for considering differences among canonical functional networks, these systems
were defined in healthy adult brains—it is therefore perhaps dubious to
assume that these networks follow a similar spatial organization in callosotomy
patients. Data-driven community detection techniques afford assessments of
functional network topology unbeholden to prior assumptions about specific
brain regions and their canonical network memberships (28, 71). This is achieved
via decomposition of FC matrices using modularity maximization algorithms,
which group regions into functional modules: These represent regions that are
generally more functionally coupled to each other than they are connected to
other regions. The optimization objective is subject to a quality metric, Q—unlike
our previous laterality analysis (which required separating out positive and
negative edges), this can be estimated over FC matrices composed of both
positive and negative correlations (72). We performed this decomposition
using the community_louvain function from the Brain Connectivity Toolbox
(https://sites.google.com/site/bctnet/) with asymmetric treatment of negative
edge weights (72, 73). Importantly, modularity maximization is sensitive to
spatial scale, subject to a resolution parameter, 𝛾 (30). Small values of 𝛾
typically yield coarse partitions with a small number of large communities;
larger values of 𝛾, by contrast, afford more fine-grained partitions. Because
the solution of this decomposition is dependent upon one’s choice for the
resolution parameter, we tested a range of values from 𝛾 = [0.10, 2] (in steps
of 0.10). To further account for variability in community assignments (e.g., due
to algorithmic stochasticity arising from random initializations), we estimated
modularity 1,000 times for each value of 𝛾—optimal consensus partitions were
obtained using the consensus_similarity function from the Network Community
Toolbox (https://commdetect.weebly.com/).

PNAS

2025

Vol. 122

No. 43

e2520190122

Insimilarfashiontothe networklateralityindicesdescribedabove, we derived
a modular laterality index for the resulting partitions according to prior work (29).
This metric is limited to the [0, 1] interval, where a value of 0, for example,
indicates that all functional communities are perfectly bilateral (i.e., the number
of brain regions constituting each community are equally balanced between the
left and right hemispheres), and values closer to 1 indicate progressively more
lateralized topologies. We note that in this case, more fine-grained partitions
may be beneficial for assessing modular laterality. Nevertheless, the results
shown in Figs. 4 and 5 reflect a “default” 𝛾 = 1 and we further illustrate in SI
Appendix, Fig. S4 that full splits rapidly diverge from controls even at smaller
values of 𝛾 (while partial splits and healthy controls remain relatively consistent,
regardless of 𝛾).
Interhemispheric Network Dynamics. Finally, we used ETS (32) to assess
the extent to which many brain regions in the left and right hemispheres
dynamically cofluctuate in synchrony. The ETS approach has been used to
obtain moment-to-moment, time-resolved estimates of FC and characterize
the nature of high-amplitude events (33) that occur when multivariate BOLD
signals simultaneously fluctuate together over brief intervals of time—these
bursts of synchronized network dynamics are sufficient to recapitulate “static”
FC estimates over the course of a scan (33), and importantly, they are
independent of head motion (32). Current evidence instead suggests these highamplitude cofluctuations are governed, in part, by the modular organization
of the brain and its underlying structural architecture (31). An ETS can be
computed by taking a pair of regional BOLD time series, Z-scoring them, and
taking the elementwise product of the signals at each timepoint—the mean
of an ETS is equivalent to the zero-order Pearson correlation between the
two time series, and thus ETS constitute a temporal-unwrapping of FC over
the scan.
Here, we first separated out all regions in the left hemisphere and all regions
in the right hemisphere. We constructed a 23,220 × T ETS matrix for each
hemisphere, where T gives the number of timepoints and 23,220 gives the total
number of edges within each hemisphere. A summary time course quantifying
the total amplitude of intrahemispheric cofluctuations at any given moment
(i.e., across all edges) was obtained by taking the RSS at each timepoint (33).
We then computed the Spearman correlation between the left hemisphere RSS
and right hemisphere RSS time series to capture the extent to which network
dynamics in each hemisphere were synchronized.
Data, Materials, and Software Availability. Patient data will be made

available upon reasonable request to the corresponding authors; all relevant
processing and analysis code may be found on GitHub (https://github.com/
tsantander/splitBrainNetworks) (74).
T.S., S.B., J.M.S., H.E.S., B.G., and M.B.M. were
sponsored by the Army Research Office under contract W911NF-19-D-0001
for the Institute for Collaborative Biotechnologies. T.P. and L.J.V. were funded
by the German Research Foundation (CRC-1451, Project 431549029).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS.

Author affiliations: a Institute for Collaborative Biotechnologies, University of California,
Santa Barbara, CA 93106; b Department of Psychological & Brain Sciences, University
of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106; c Department of Neurology, Medical Faculty,
University of Cologne, University Hospital Cologne, Cologne 50937, Germany;
d Department of Epileptology, Krankenhaus Mara, Bethel Epilepsy Center, Medical School
OWL, Bielefeld University, Bielefeld 33617, Germany; e Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Department, Society for Epilepsy Research, Krankenhaus Mara, Bethel Epilepsy Center,
Bielefeld 33617, Germany; f Department of Neurosurgery, Evangelisches Klinikum
Bethel, Medical School OWL, Bielefeld University, Bielefeld 33617, Germany; and
g Department of Psychological & Brain Sciences, Indiana University, Bloomington,
IN 47405
Author contributions: T.S., S.B., T.P., J.M.S., V.M.W., H.E.S., J.L.H., A.R., F.G.W., B.G., C.G.B.,
O.S., M.S.G., L.J.V., and M.B.M. designed research; T.S., T.P., V.M.W., J.L.H., A.R., F.G.W.,
T.K., and L.J.V. performed research; T.S., J.M.S., and O.S. analyzed data; B.G., L.J.V., and
M.B.M. secured funding; A.R. and C.G.B. oversaw patient recruitment; A.R., C.G.B., L.J.V.,
and M.B.M. supervised all research activities; and T.S., T.K., O.S., M.S.G., L.J.V., and M.B.M.
wrote the paper.
Reviewers: S.A.H., University of California San Diego; and C.K., Allen Institute for Brain
Science.
The authors declare no competing interest.

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2520190122

9 of 10

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 46.229.243.203 on October 7, 2026 from IP address 46.229.243.203.

1.
2.

D. S. Bassett, O. Sporns, Network neuroscience. Nat. Neurosci. 20, 353–364 (2017).
C. J. Honey et al., Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural
connectivity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 106, 2035–2040 (2009).
3. M. P. van den Heuvel, R. C. Mandl, R. S. Kahn, H. E. Hulshoff Pol, Functionally linked resting-state
networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain. Hum. Brain
Mapp. 30, 3127–3141 (2009).
4. M. Fukushima et al., Structure-function relationships during segregated and integrated network
states of human brain functional connectivity. Brain Struct. Funct. 223, 1091–1106 (2018).
5. A. M. Hermundstad et al., Structural foundations of resting-state and task-based functional
connectivity in the human brain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110, 6169–6174 (2013).
6. A. M. Hermundstad et al., Structurally-constrained relationships between cognitive states in the
human brain. PLoS Comput. Biol. 10, e1003591 (2014).
7. S. Hofer, J. Frahm, Topography of the human corpus callosum revisited-comprehensive fiber
tractography using diffusion tensor magnetic resonance imaging. Neuroimage 32, 989–994
(2006).
8. Y. Liu et al., Connectivity-based topographical changes of the corpus callosum during aging. Front.
Aging Neurosci. 13, 753236 (2021).
9. S. C. Hung et al., Early recovery of interhemispheric functional connectivity after corpus
callosotomy. Epilepsia 60, 1126–1136 (2019).
10. J. M. Johnston et al., Loss of resting interhemispheric functional connectivity after complete section
of the corpus callosum. J. Neurosci. 28, 6453–6458 (2008).
11. J. L. Roland et al., On the role of the corpus callosum in interhemispheric functional connectivity in
humans. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 114, 13278–13283 (2017).
12. C. E. Pizoli et al., Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 108, 11638–11643 (2011).
13. M. S. Gazzaniga, Forty-five years of split-brain research and still going strong. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 6,
653–659 (2005).
14. L. J. Volz, M. S. Gazzaniga, Interaction in isolation: 50 years of insights from split-brain research.
Brain 140, 2051–2060 (2017).
15. M. Miller, L. Volz, J. Simonson, M. Gazzaniga, Split-Brain Patients: A Clinical versus Experimental
Perspective, C. Papagno, P. Corballis, Eds. (Elsevier BV, San Diego, 2025).
16. S. Bekir et al., No disconnection syndrome after near-complete callosotomy. bioRxiv [Preprint]
(2025). https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.02.16.638524 (Accessed 28 April 2025).
17. M. Fabri et al., Posterior corpus callosum and interhemispheric transfer of somatosensory
information: An fMRI and neuropsychological study of a partially callosotomized patient.
Neuroimage 13, 1071–1079 (2001).
18. M. Saenz, I. Fine, Topographic organization of v1 projections through the corpus callosum in
humans. Neuroimage 52, 1224–1229 (2010).
19. R. Ciric et al., Benchmarking of participant-level confound regression strategies for the control of
motion artifact in studies of functional connectivity. Neuroimage 154, 174–187 (2017).
20. L. Parkes, B. Fulcher, M. Yucel, A. Fornito, An evaluation of the efficacy, reliability, and sensitivity
of motion correction strategies for resting-state functional MRI. Neuroimage 171, 415–436
(2018).
21. B. T. Yeo et al., The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional
connectivity. J. Neurophysiol. 106, 1125–1165 (2011).
22. A. Schaefer et al., Local-global parcellation of the human cerebral cortex from intrinsic functional
connectivity MRI. Cereb. Cortex 28, 3095–3114 (2018).
23. Y. Tian, D. S. Margulies, M. Breakspear, A. Zalesky, Topographic organization of the human
subcortex unveiled with functional connectivity gradients. Nat. Neurosci. 23, 1421–1432 (2020).
24. M. Catani, M. Schotten, Atlas of Human Brain Connections (Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK,
2012).
25. M. D. Patel, N. Toussaint, G. D. Charles-Edwards, J. P. Lin, P. G. Batchelor, Distribution and fibre
field similarity mapping of the human anterior commissure fibres by diffusion tensor imaging.
MAGMA 23, 399–408 (2010).
26. G. Di Virgilio, S. Clarke, G. Pizzolato, T. Schaffner, Cortical regions contributing to the anterior
commissure in man. Exp. Brain Res. 124, 1–7 (1999).
27. D. S. Bassett, M. S. Gazzaniga, Understanding complexity in the human brain. Trends Cogn. Sci. 15,
200–209 (2011).
28. O. Sporns, R. F. Betzel, Modular brain networks. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 67, 613–640 (2016).
29. K. W. Doron, D. S. Bassett, M. S. Gazzaniga, Dynamic network structure of interhemispheric
coordination. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 109, 18661–18668 (2012).
30. S. Fortunato, M. Barthelemy, Resolution limit in community detection. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
104, 36–41 (2007).
31. M. Pope, M. Fukushima, R. F. Betzel, O. Sporns, Modular origins of high-amplitude cofluctuations
in fine-scale functional connectivity dynamics. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 118, e2109380118
(2021).
32. J. Faskowitz, F. Z. Esfahlani, Y. Jo, O. Sporns, R. F. Betzel, Edge-centric functional network
representations of human cerebral cortex reveal overlapping system-level architecture. Nat.
Neurosci. 23, 1644–1654 (2020).
33. F. Zamani Esfahlani et al., High-amplitude cofluctuations in cortical activity drive functional
connectivity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 117, 28393–28401 (2020).
34. P. Barttfeld et al., Signature of consciousness in the dynamics of resting-state brain activity. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 112, 887–892 (2015).
35. V. J. Sydnor et al., Neurodevelopment of the association cortices: Patterns, mechanisms, and
implications for psychopathology. Neuron 109, 2820–2846 (2021).
36. J. E. Reynolds, M. N. Grohs, D. Dewey, C. Lebel, Global and regional white matter development in
early childhood. Neuroimage 196, 49–58 (2019).
37. U. A. Tooley et al., The age of reason: Functional brain network development during childhood.
J. Neurosci. 42, 8237–8251 (2022).

10 of 10

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2520190122

38. K. J. Whitaker et al., Adolescence is associated with genomically patterned consolidation of the
hubs of the human brain connectome. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 113, 9105–9110 (2016).
39. J. M. Tyszka, D. P. Kennedy, R. Adolphs, L. K. Paul, Intact bilateral resting-state networks in the
absence of the corpus callosum. J. Neurosci. 31, 15154–15162 (2011).
40. M. Lassonde, H. Sauerwein, A. J. Chicoine, G. Geoffroy, Absence of disconnexion syndrome in
callosal agenesis and early callosotomy: Brain reorganization or lack of structural specificity during
ontogeny? Neuropsychologia 29, 481–495 (1991).
41. D. Graham, M. M. Tisdall, D. Gill, Corpus callosotomy outcomes in pediatric patients: A systematic
review. Epilepsia 57, 1053–1068 (2016).
42. E. Fuchs, G. Flugge, Adult neuroplasticity: More than 40 years of research. Neural Plast 2014,
541870 (2014).
43. J. S. Nomi et al., Diffusion weighted imaging evidence of extra-callosal pathways for
interhemispheric communication after complete commissurotomy. Brain Struct. Funct. 224,
1897–1909 (2019).
44. L. Q. Uddin et al., Residual functional connectivity in the split-brain revealed with resting-state
functional MRI. Neuroreport 19, 703–709 (2008).
45. I. Marcantoni et al., Interhemispheric functional connectivity: An fMRI study in callosotomized
patients. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 18, 1363098 (2024).
46. J. X. O’Reilly et al., Causal effect of disconnection lesions on interhemispheric functional
connectivity in rhesus monkeys. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110, 13982–13987 (2013).
47. M. G. Funnell, P. M. Corballis, M. S. Gazzaniga, Cortical and subcortical interhemispheric
interactions following partial and complete callosotomy. Arch. Neurol. 57, 185–189 (2000).
48. M. S. Gazzaniga, H. Freedman, Observations on visual processes after posterior callosal section.
Neurology 23, 1126–1130 (1973).
49. G. L. Risse, J. Gates, G. Lund, R. Maxwell, A. Rubens, Interhemispheric transfer in patients with
incomplete section of the corpus callosum. Anatomic verification with magnetic resonance
imaging. Arch. Neurol. 46, 437–443 (1989).
50. M. S. Gazzaniga, Interhemispheric Integration, P. Rakic, W. Singer, Eds. (John Wiley & Sons,
New York, 1988), pp. 385–405.
51. C. Seguin, L. S. Mansour, O. Sporns, A. Zalesky, F. Calamante, Network communication models
narrow the gap between the modular organization of structural and functional brain networks.
Neuroimage 257, 119323 (2022).
52. L. E. Suarez, R. D. Markello, R. F. Betzel, B. Misic, Linking structure and function in macroscale brain
networks. Trends Cogn. Sci. 24, 302–315 (2020).
53. B. Misic et al., Network-level structure-function relationships in human neocortex. Cereb. Cortex 26,
3285–3296 (2016).
54. F. Aboitiz, A. B. Scheibel, R. S. Fisher, E. Zaidel, Fiber composition of the human corpus callosum.
Brain Res. 598, 143–153 (1992).
55. F. Aboitiz, J. Lopez, J. Montiel, Long distance communication in the human brain: Timing
constraints for inter-hemispheric synchrony and the origin of brain lateralization. Biol. Res. 36,
89–99 (2003).
56. A. Horowitz et al., In vivo correlation between axon diameter and conduction velocity in the human
brain. Brain Struct. Funct. 220, 1777–1788 (2015).
57. M. P. van den Heuvel, O. Sporns, Rich-club organization of the human connectome. J. Neurosci. 31,
15775–15786 (2011).
58. P. Hagmann et al., Mapping the structural core of human cerebral cortex. PLoS Biol. 6, e159
(2008).
59. C. Koch, M. Massimini, M. Boly, G. Tononi, Neural correlates of consciousness: Progress and
problems. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 17, 307–321 (2016).
60. L. Melloni et al., An adversarial collaboration protocol for testing contrasting predictions of global
neuronal workspace and integrated information theory. PLoS One 18, e0268577 (2023).
61. C. Koch, M. Massimini, M. Boly, G. Tononi, Posterior and anterior cortex - where is the difference
that makes the difference? Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 17, 666 (2016).
62. D. C. Van Essen et al., The human connectome project: A data acquisition perspective. Neuroimage
62, 2222–2231 (2012).
63. D. C. Van Essen et al., The Wu-Minn human connectome project: An overview. Neuroimage 80,
62–79 (2013).
64. N. J. Tustison et al., The ANTsX ecosystem for quantitative biological and medical imaging. Sci. Rep.
11, 9068 (2021).
65. N. J. Tustison et al., Large-scale evaluation of ants and freesurfer cortical thickness measurements.
Neuroimage 99, 166–179 (2014).
66. A. C. Evans, A. L. Janke, D. L. Collins, S. Baillet, Brain templates and atlases. Neuroimage 62,
911–922 (2012).
67. M. Jenkinson, C. F. Beckmann, T. E. Behrens, M. W. Woolrich, S. M. Smith, FSL. Neuroimage 62,
782–790 (2012).
68. K. Hua et al., Tract probability maps in stereotaxic spaces: Analyses of white matter anatomy and
tract-specific quantification. Neuroimage 39, 336–347 (2008).
69. S. Wakana et al., Reproducibility of quantitative tractography methods applied to cerebral white
matter. Neuroimage 36, 630–644 (2007).
70. K. J. Friston, P. Rotshtein, J. J. Geng, P. Sterzer, R. N. Henson, A critique of functional localisers.
Neuroimage 30, 1077–1087 (2006).
71. F. Zamani Esfahlani et al., Modularity maximization as a flexible and generic framework for brain
network exploratory analysis. Neuroimage 244, 118607 (2021).
72. M. Rubinov, O. Sporns, Weight-conserving characterization of complex functional brain networks.
Neuroimage 56, 2068–2079 (2011).
73. M. Rubinov, O. Sporns, Complex network measures of brain connectivity: Uses and interpretations.
Neuroimage 52, 1059–1069 (2010).
74. T. Santander et al., SplitBrainNetworks. Github. https://github.com/tsantander/splitBrainNetworks.
Deposited 29 September 2025.

pnas.org

