www.nature.com/npp

ARTICLE OPEN

The effect of lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) on whole-brain
functional and effective connectivity
✉
Peter Bedford1,10, Daniel J. Hauke 2,10 , Zheng Wang1, Volker Roth3, Monika Nagy-Huber 3, Friederike
Holze 4
, Laura Ley4,
4 4
Patrick Vizeli , Matthias E. Liechti , Stefan Borgwardt 5, Felix Müller6,11 and Andreea O.
Diaconescu1,7,8,9,11

© The Author(s) 2023

Psychedelics have emerged as promising candidate treatments for various psychiatric conditions, and
given their clinical potential,
there is a need to identify biomarkers that underlie their effects. Here, we investigate the neural
mechanisms of lysergic acid
diethylamide (LSD) using regression dynamic causal modelling (rDCM), a novel technique that assesses
whole-brain effective
connectivity (EC) during resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). We modelled
data from two randomised,
placebo-controlled, double-blind, cross-over trials, in which 45 participants were administered 100
μg LSD and placebo in two
resting-state fMRI sessions. We compared EC against whole-brain functional connectivity (FC) using
classical statistics and machine
learning methods. Multivariate analyses of EC parameters revealed predominantly stronger
interregional connectivity and reduced
self-inhibition under LSD compared to placebo, with the notable exception of weakened interregional
connectivity and increased
1234567890();,:

self-inhibition in occipital brain regions as well as subcortical regions. Together, these ﬁndings
suggests that LSD perturbs the
Excitation/Inhibition balance of the brain. Notably, whole-brain EC did not only provide additional
mechanistic insight into the
effects of LSD on the Excitation/Inhibition balance of the brain, but EC also correlated with global
subjective effects of LSD and
discriminated experimental conditions in a machine learning-based analysis with high accuracy
(91.11%), highlighting the potential
of using whole-brain EC to decode or predict subjective effects of LSD in the future.

Neuropsychopharmacology; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41386-023-01574-8

INTRODUCTION represents the proportion of one signal’s variance, which can be
Psychedelics like psilocybin and lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) explained by another signal, and
vice versa. Though much of the
have emerged as promising new treatment candidates for a research investigating FC changes under LSD
suggests that FC is a
variety of psychiatric conditions including substance dependence promising candidate for a
clinically-relevant biomarker [10–18], FC
[1–3], major depression [4], anxiety disorders [5], and adjustment can be limited in terms of its
interpretability.
disorders [6–8]. Since both LSD and psilocybin primarily act on Firstly, FC is an undirected measure
of connectivity, because
5-HT2A receptors, an increasing number of clinical trials using computation of the correlation
coefﬁcient is commutative.
psychedelics have been registered to evaluate their efﬁcacy for Secondly, it ignores two important
organisational principles of
treatment of depressive disorders and other psychiatric conditions the cortex: (1) the asymmetry of
connections [21, 22] and (2) the
[9]. Given this clinical potential and growing interest in precision presence of gain regulation
within a cortical region or ’self-
psychiatry, we sought to examine the neural mechanisms that connections’. In contrast to FC, EC
rests on a mechanistic model of
underpin whole-brain effects of LSD by employing computational how the data were generated [23] and
estimates both, asymmetry
modelling and machine learning. and the gain within a cortical region. Here, we adopt a
Functional connectivity (FC) [10–18] and effective connectivity mechanistic perspective and examine
LSD-driven changes in
(EC) [19, 20] have already shown promise in providing a directed inﬂuences between nodes, as well as
asymmetry and self-
framework for uncovering the neural mechanisms underlying inhibition across the brain.
LSD. Both connectivity measures are widely used, but are In this exploratory analysis, we estimated
whole-brain EC using
interpretatively distinct: FC is commonly assessed using Pearson regression dynamic causal modelling
(rDCM; [24]), a recently
correlation coefﬁcients—a measure of the linear relationship— developed variant of dynamic causal
modelling (DCM; [25]). rDCM
between the BOLD signal time series of two distinct brain regions. allows estimation of whole-brain
EC by applying several modiﬁca-
In a general linear model, the squared correlation coefﬁcient tions and simpliﬁcations to the
original DCM framework by

Krembil Centre for Neuroinformatics, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (CAMH), Toronto, ON,
Canada. 2Centre for Medical Image Computing, Department of Computer
Science, University College London, London, UK. 3Department of Mathematics and Computer Science,
University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland. 4Division of Clinical Pharmacology
and Toxicology, Department of Biomedicine and Department of Clinical Research, University Hospital
Basel, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland. 5Department of Psychiatry and
Psychotherapy, Translational Psychiatry, Lübeck, Germany. 6Department of Psychiatry (UPK),
University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland. 7Department of Psychiatry, University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 8Institute of Medical Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON,
Canada. 9Department of Psychology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
These authors contributed equally: Peter Bedford, Daniel J. Hauke. 11These authors jointly
supervised this work: Felix Müller, Andreea O. Diaconescu. ✉email: d.hauke@ucl.ac.uk

Received: 14 November 2022 Revised: 22 March 2023 Accepted: 23 March 2023
P. Bedford et al.
reformulating a linear DCM in the time domain as a linear Bayesian the scope of this paper and will
be investigated in future studies. Singular
regression in the frequency domain [26]. Furthermore, this model value decomposition (SVD) was
applied to the mean-centred matrix of FC,
has been recently extended to allow modelling of task-free or EC, and self-connections separately.
SVD re-expresses this matrix as a set of
resting-state magnetic resonance imaging (rs-MRI) data [24, 27], orthogonal singular vectors or
latent variables (LVs), the number of which
enabling us to study—for the ﬁrst time—how whole-brain is equivalent to the total number of
conditions for mean-centred task PLSC
and one LV for the behavioral PLSC. The LVs can be understood analogous
effective connectivity is altered under LSD. Modelling asymmetry to principal components in
principal component analsis and account for
of directed inﬂuences and within-region gain can potentially the covariance of the original mean-
centred matrix in decreasing order of
provide additional useful information about the neural mechan- magnitude. Statistical signiﬁcance of
LVs and reliability of region loadings
isms underlying LSD effects. on the LVs were assessed using permutation tests with 2000 permutations
To assess this, we also compared FC and EC in terms of their and bootstrapping with 2000 samples,
respectively. To account for inter-
ability to distinguish LSD from placebo at the individual level. In individual variability in
baseline physiology (Table S2), connectivity
future studies, these computationally-informed biomarkers could features were ﬁrst explained by
baseline heart rate, diastolic and systolic
potentially be leveraged to predict the subjective effects of blood pressure, and body temperature
and PLSC was performed on the
residuals that could not be explained by physiological effects (Supple-
psychedelics.
ment).
Machine learning analysis. We trained random forest classiﬁers [35] on
either whole-brain FC or EC as features to classify conditions (LSD versus
MATERIALS AND METHODS placebo; Supplement, Fig. S1). Feature preprocessing consisted of pruning
Participants and covariate correction for physiological variables (Supplement) and was
Data from two randomised, placebo-controlled, double-blind, cross-over embedded in a 5-fold cross-
validation. We report cross-validated balanced
trials were aggregated comprising 20 healthy participants (10 male, 10 accuracy (BAC) to estimate
generalisibility of the classiﬁers, which was
female; age 32 ± 11 [mean ± SD]; range 25 − 60 years; body weight, tested against chance performance
using permutation tests with 1000
68.8 ± 7.7 kg; trial A: NCT02308969 [28, 29]) and 25 healthy participants (12 label permutations. We
further compared FC against EC classiﬁers using
men, 13 women; age 28 ± 4.3; range 25 − 45 years; body weight, McNemar’s tests. Lastly, we report
mean decrease in accuracy on permuted
70.2 ± 11.2 kg; trial B: NCT03019822 [30]). More details including previous out-of-bag samples for
each connection to measure feature importance.
use of hallucinogens and in- and exclusion criteria are provided in the
Supplement. Both studies were approved by the Ethics Committee for
Northwest/Central Switzerland and by the Federal Ofﬁce of Public Health. RESULTS
All participants provided written consent and received monetary
compensation. The effect of LSD on functional connectivity
Mass-univariate tests suggested that about 23% (1993/8646)
unique correlation coefﬁcients signiﬁcantly differed across LSD
Experimental procedure and placebo conditions (p < 0.05). Among these connections, we
Participants were administered 100 μg LSD orally in capsules (trial A) or
observed mostly stronger FC under LSD (Fig. 1A–C, Fig. S2).
vials (trial (B) and identical mannitol and ethanol-ﬁlled placebo capsules/
vials in a cross-over design across two separate experimental sessions with
a time between sessions of at least 7 days (17 ± 35.3 days [median ± SD], Partial least squares
correlation analysis. PLSC analysis of FC
range: 7−182 days). Each session included an assessment of brain activity showed a signiﬁcant
condition effect on the ﬁrst LV (LSD condition
during rest using fMRI, which was acquired 140.5 ± 10.9 min [median ± SD] score: 4.442 [3.785,
5.076], placebo: −4.442[−5.076,
(range: 121−200 min) after administration of LSD or placebo. (see −3.785], p < 0.001), but not on
the second LV (p = 1.000). LV
Supplement for data acquisition parameters and preprocessing proce- loadings indicated that FC was
stronger under LSD compared to
dure). Participants were instructed to close their eyes and remain awake placebo across a large
number of regions. The most reliable
during the scan. Subjective effects were assessed with the 5 Dimensions of effects were observed for
the following regions connections:
Altered States of Consciousness (5D-ASC) scale [31, 32] 11h after drug bilateral lingual gyrus and
bilateral inferior frontal gurys (pars
administration. Participants were asked to retrospectively rate the drug
effects. opercularis), right inferior frontal gyrus and right lingual gyrus, left
cuneus and right middle frontal gyrus (MFG), and left temporo-
occipital middle temporal gyrus (MTG) and left intracalcerine
Data analysis cortex (bootstrap ratios (BSR) > 6.3). Conversely, weaker FC under
Functional connectivity. We computed FC using Pearson correlations LSD was found between several
occipital regions, including left
between the BOLD signal time series of each pair of the 132 distinct brain
regions derived from the Harvard-Oxford atlas, yielding 8648 unique fusiform gyrus and right
inferior lateral occipital cortex (LOC),
correlation coefﬁcients. Please, see Table S1 in the Supplement for details supracalcarine cortex,
occipital pole, and between bilateral puta-
on software for all subsequent analyses. men and cerebellum (BSR ≤ −5.0; Fig. 2). Behavioural PLSC
revealed a signiﬁcant correlation between FC measures and
Effective connectivity. EC for fully connected whole-brain networks was subjective effects (r =
0.775 [0.069, 0.858], p = 0.031, Fig. S4B).
estimated from the raw time series of all 132 regions of interest (ROIs) Most reliable, positive
loadings were observed for several cortical
using rDCM [24, 26, 27] (Supplement). regions including inferior frontal gyrus (pars opercularis)
and
postcentral gyrus (Fig. S4A). Conversely, most reliable negative
Statistical analysis. Connectivity changes under LSD were investigated loadings were observed for
connections between occipital and
using two complementary approaches: (1) linear multivariate tests and (2) cerebellar regions (Fig.
S4A).
machine learning, which allowed us to assess multi-variate, non-linear
changes and quantify how well we were able to distinguish LSD from
placebo at the single-participant level. This second analysis served as an Machine learning
analysis. The random forest trained on FC as
additional test to gauge the potential of using connectivity features to features (FC model)
discriminated between LSD and placebo
decode or predict subjective effects in future studies. We supplement with a BAC of 86% (p < 0.001;
Table S3, Figure S3). Feature
these results with mass-univariate (paired-sample) t-tests with Benjamini importance measures
suggested that connections involving at
and Hochberg [33] correction for multiple testing to control the false least one occipital region
(38 of the top 50 regions ranked by
discovery rate (FDR; α < 0.05). feature importance or at least one prefrontal region (14/50) were
Partial least squares correlation analysis. Mean-centred task or beha- most relevant for this
classiﬁcation performance. Of the twelve
vioural partial least squares correlation (PLSC) analysis was used to capture connections that did
not involve occipital regions, four connected
FC or EC that maximally represented differences between LSD and placebo
frontal and parietal regions, and the remaining temporal and
conditions or that maximally correlated with subjective effects (5D-ASC
global score), respectively [34]. A detailed investigation of subjective
parietal regions (Fig. S2C). The connections remaining in the top
effects (including subscales and pleasant vs unpleasant effects) is beyond 10 involved connections
between occipital brain regions as well as

Neuropsychopharmacology
P. Bedford et al.

Fig. 1 Connectogram views of differences in functional (FC) and effective connectivity (EC) between
LSD and placebo conditions.
A Across-participant average FC in the LSD condition. B Across-participant average FC in the placebo
condition. C Across-participant t-statistic
values of difference between FC in LSD and placebo conditions. D Feature importance estimates for
the FC classiﬁcation model. See ’Statistical
analysis’ for a detailed deﬁnition of feature importance. E Across-participant average EC in the LSD
condition. F Across-participant average EC
in the placebo condition. G Across-participant t-statistic values of difference between EC in LSD
and placebo conditions. H Feature importance
estimates for the EC classiﬁcation model. Differences in magnitudes of connectivity are indicated in
each connectogram by both line width
and opacity. In (C) (FC) and (G) (EC), orange and blue lines indicate stronger and weaker
connectivity, respectively, in connectivity in the LSD
condition. Note that for (E)–(H), both directional EC values between each pair of regions have been
averaged for display. To maintain visibility,
only the top 250 connections have been displayed. PFr Prefrontal cortex. Fr Frontal cortex. Ins
Insular cortex. Tem Temporal cortex. Par Parietal
cortex. Occ Occipital cortex. SbC Subcortical regions. CeB Cerebellum. Ver Vermis. Bstem Brainstem.

connections from occipital regions to prefrontal and temporal cortex, intracalcarine cortex, and
fusiform gyrus (BSR < − 6.0;
regions (Fig. S2D). Fig. 2). Behavioural PLSC revealed a signiﬁcant correlation
between FC measures and subjective effects
The effect of LSD on effective connectivity (r = 0.932[0.906, 0.957], p = 0.047, Fig. S4E). Most
reliable, positive
Mass-univariate tests suggested that about 13% (2184/17424) loadings were observed for connections
between several cortical
effective connections coefﬁcients signiﬁcantly differed across areas, such as angular gyrus and
inferior frontal gyrus (pars
conditions (p < 0.05). As with LSD-induced changes in FC, we triangularis) as well as amygdala (Fig.
S4D). Conversely, most
observed mostly stronger EC under LSD (Fig. 1E–G, Fig. S2). reliable negative loadings were observed
for connections between
However, surprisingly, among the most prominent differences was occipital and cerebellar regions
(Fig. S4D).
weaker EC between occipital brain regions under LSD. We further
investigated how LSD impacted thalamic connectivity speciﬁcally. Machine learning analysis. The
random forest trained on EC as
We found that connectivity from thalamus to other brain areas, features (EC model) performed with a
BAC of 91.1% (p < 0.001;
but also from other cortical regions to thalamus was stronger Table S3, Fig. S3). As with the mass-
univariate and PLSC analysis,
(Fig. 3). connections involving occipital regions were the most predomi-
nant features driving the classiﬁcation performance (Fig. S2G, H).
Partial least squares correlation analysis. PLSC analysis of EC Of the top 50 connections (ranked by
feature importance), the
showed a statistically signiﬁcant condition effect on the ﬁrst LV majority (39/50) represented
connections between pairs of
(LSD condition score: 0.060 [0.067, 0.052], placebo: −0.060 occipital regions. The highest-ranked
connection involving a
[−0.053, −0.067], p < 0.001), but not on the second LV non-occipital region included right
dorsolateral PFC to right
(p = 1.000). Similar to the PLSC results based on FC data, we lingual gyrus and left dorsolateral
PFC to left cerebellum. This
found that EC was primarily stronger under LSD. Reliable loadings ﬁnding suggests that these
connections were not only signiﬁ-
were observed for connections between occipital and prefrontal cantly different under LSD (Fig. 1G),
but also contributed
regions, including inferior frontal gyrus (pars opercularis) and substantially to highly-accurate
individual-level discrimination
bilateral lingual gyrus, anterior cingulate cortex and right occipital performance.
pole, anterior cingulate cortex and right fusiform gyrus, left
cuneus and right MFG, left intracalcarine cortex and left MTG, right Comparing functional vs
effective connectivity changes under
lingual gyrus, and superior frontal gyrus, anterior cingulate cortex LSD
and right intracalcalcarine cortex, and right precentral gryus and The effect of LSD on inhibitory
self-connections. As pointed out in
left superior LOC (BSR > 5.5). The reverse pattern showing weaker the Introduction, an advantage of
using EC over FC is that
EC under LSD was observed exclusively between several occipital rDCM allows estimation of inhibitory
self-connections (see
regions, including the occipital pole, lingual gyrus, supracalacarine Supplement). These all-
negative values can be interpreted as

Neuropsychopharmacology
P. Bedford et al.

Fig. 2 Graphical and anatomical visualisations of partial least squares (PLS) correlation analysis
results. A Bootstrap ratios (BSRs) of whole-
brain EC reﬂecting condition differences. BSRs are the ratios of the loadings on the latent variable
and the standard errors estimated from
bootstrapping. The larger the magnitude of a BSR, the larger the weight (i.e., the loading on the
latent variable) and the smaller the standard
error (i.e., higher stability; [55, 56]). BSRs can be understood analogous to z-scores if bootstrap
distributions are approximately normal [57].
B Leading Eigenvector reﬂecting condition differences in whole-brain EC across brain regions. C
Brain region saliences reﬂecting condition
differences across self-connections. D Brain region BSRs reﬂecting condition differences across
self-connections. For (A)-(D): Orange and blue
areas indicate stronger and weaker connectivity respectively, respectively, under LSD compared to
placebo. PFr: Prefrontal cortex. Fr: Frontal
cortex. Ins: Insular cortex. Tem: Temporal cortex. Par: Parietal cortex. Occ: Occipital cortex. SbC:
Subcortical regions. CeB: Cerebellum. Ver:
Vermis. Bstem: Brainstem.

‘decay-rate’ coefﬁcients (in view of the DCM state equation) largest disinhibition under LSD was
noted in the cerebellum,
since they capture the tendency of different regions to return to bilateral pallidum,
parahippocampal gyri, and inferior temporal
baseline, rather than increasing activity indeﬁnitely. Also note gyrus (Fig. 2D).
that these values reﬂect local as opposed to global (inter- Note that all self-connections are
negative. Disinhibition in
regional) dynamics. any individual brain area suggests that this area becomes less
Mass-univariate tests suggested that about 30% (39/132) stable under LSD from a dynamic system
viewpoint, since the
inhibitory self-connections signiﬁcantly differed across condi- system moves closer to a critical
point as self-connections
tions (p < 0.05). Occipital regions once again displayed the approach zero.
greatest effects showing more negative local connectivity under Machine learning analysis
Restricting the feature rankings of
LSD (Fig. 4, Fig. S2). the EC model (see ‘Machine learning analysis’) to self-connec-
Partial least squares correlation analysis. LSC analysis per- tions, we found again that many of the
most important
formed on self-con-nections showed a signiﬁcant condition connections were occipital. Among the top
10 self-connections
effect on the ﬁrst LV (LSD condition score: 0.0004 [0.00003, ranked by feature importance were two
non-occipital connec-
0.00005], placebo: −0.0004 [−0.0005, −0.0003], p < 0.001), but tions, namely Vermis 8 and right
Cerebellum 8 (Fig. 4).
not on the second LV (p = 1.000). Self-connections were more
inhibitory (i.e., became more negative) under LSD primarily in Asymmetry in directed connectivity.
Recall that while FC provides
occipital, parietal, and prefrontal regions (Fig. 2C4). Stronger self- a measure of the correlation
between the activities of each pair of
inhibition under LSD occurred in the bilateral lingual gyri, brain regions, EC provides an estimate
of directed effects between
intracalcarine cortex, fusiform gyri, occipital pole, cuneus, pairs of regions, which may be
asymmetrical. We tested for the
posterior supramarginal gyrus and supracalcarine cortex presence of asymmetry (by mass-univariate
comparison) in each
(Fig. 2D). Conversely, disinhibition under LSD was observed in condition (LSD and placebo), and
tested whether asymmetry was
temporal, subcortical and brainstem regions (Fig. 2D). The affected by LSD (drug-by-asymmetry
interaction). The number of

Neuropsychopharmacology
P. Bedford et al.

Fig. 3 Connectogram views of thalamic effective connectivity (EC). Across-participant t-statistic
values of the difference between LSD and
placebo conditions in outgoing (A) or incoming (B) thalamic connections (thresholded at p < 0.05,
whole-brain FDR-corrected). Differences in
magnitudes of connectivity are indicated by both line width and opacity. Orange lines indicate
stronger connectivity under LSD. Please, see
Supplement for region abbreviation key.

Fig. 4 Effect of LSD on inhibitory self-connections. A t-statistic of the difference between LSD and
placebo conditions in self-connections.
B Top 10 self-connections ranked by t-statistic of the difference between LSD and placebo
conditions. C Anatomical colourmap of t-statistic of
the difference between LSD and placebo conditions in self-connections. D Estimates of feature
importance of self-connections in EC
classiﬁcation model. E Top 10 self-connections by feature importance in the EC classiﬁcation model.
F Anatomical colourmap displaying
feature importance of self-connections in the EC classiﬁcation model. For (A), (C): Orange and blue
areas indicate stronger and weaker
connectivity under LSD, respectively. For (B), errorbars represent the across-participant standard
deviation of the differences in connectivity
between conditions. In (B) and (E), abbreviations indicate the ROIs forming each connection. For
(E), errorbars represent the across-fold
standard deviation of the feature importance estimates. PFr Prefrontal cortex, Fr Frontal cortex,
Ins Insular cortex, Tem Temporal cortex, Par
Parietal cortex, Occ Occipital cortex, SbC Subcortical regions, CeB Cerebellum, Ver Vermis, Bstem
Brainstem.

forward-backward pairs of endogenous connectivity coefﬁcients Comparing functional and effective
connectivity classiﬁers. Lastly,
that were signiﬁcantly different (p < 0.05) was 868 out of 8648 we compared the performances of
classiﬁers trained on either FC
(10%) under LSD, 1202 (14%) in the placebo condition, and 120 or EC to test whether modelling
additional physiological details
(1.4%) for the drug-by-asymmetry interaction (Fig. 5). (i.e., self-inhibition and asymmetry)
translated into a better

Neuropsychopharmacology
P. Bedford et al.

Fig. 5 Connectogram views of asymmetries in effective connectivity (EC). A Across-participant
t-statistic of the difference in EC between the
two directions of inﬂuence between each pair of regions, for the LSD condition. B Across-participant
t-statistic of the difference in EC between
the two directions of inﬂuence between each pair of regions, for the placebo condition. C Across-
participant t-statistic of the difference in EC
between the two directions of inﬂuence between each pair of regions, and between the LSD and placebo
conditions. Differences in
magnitudes of connectivity and connectivity changes are indicated in each connectogram by both line
width and opacity. To maintain
visibility, only the top 250 connections have been displayed. PFr Prefrontal cortex, Fr Frontal
cortex, Ins Insular cortex, Tem Temporal cortex,
Par Parietal cortex, Occ Occipital cortex, SbC Subcortical regions, CeB Cerebellum, Ver Vermis,
Bstem Brainstem.

classiﬁcation performance of drug condition. While BACs differed Comparing all connections, we found
that FC and EC measures
numerically between the FC and EC classiﬁcation models (86% vs were broadly in agreement with one
another as both indicated
91% BAC), a McNemar’s test comparing the models’ performances generally stronger connectivity under
LSD, with some notably
suggested that these differences were not signiﬁcantly different weaker connectivity between
bilateral occipital areas, though this
(p > 0.074), indicating that both FC and EC may be promising effect was more pronounced in the EC
measure. Feature
biomarkers for individual-level predictions. importance also suggested that the EC classiﬁcation
relied more
heavily on the bilateral occipital connections than the FC
classiﬁcation, wherein connections involving more varied areas
DISCUSSION were represented among the highlighted ‘important` features
The goal of this study was to investigate the effects of LSD on (Figure S2).
whole-brain EC and gauge its potential as a biomarker to decode
or predict subjective effects in the future. To this end, we studied Comparison with other studies
investigating directed
LSD-induced effects on whole-brain EC through multivariate, and connectivity
machine-learning analyses and compared EC to FC. Multivariate Unlike another study that investigated
directed connectivity using
PLSC analyses revealed stronger EC between parietal, temporal Granger causality based on
magnetoencephalography (MEG)
and inferior frontal regions under LSD, but weaker EC between recordings [16], we found
predominantly stronger EC mirroring
regions in occipital cortices. When comparing FC to EC, we found stronger FC patterns across the
brain with the exception of the
notable changes in self-inhibition in around 30% of the brain aforementioned occipital connections.
This difference may be
regions under LSD, indicating that LSD may perturb the excitation/ explained by the different
methods used (Granger causality
inhibition (E/I) balance of the brain. Moreover, our results suggest measuring directed FC vs rDCM
measuring EC) or the measure-
that—while EC was asymmetric (10–14% of connections)— ment modalities and resulting differences in
temporal resolution
asymmetry was largely unaffected by LSD (1.4% of connections). (MEG vs fMRI).
Lastly, our behavioural PLS and machine learning analyses showed Moreover, [20] investigated EC in
cortico-striato-thalamo-
that both FC and EC constitute promising biomarkers for future cortical feedback loops in a sparse
network to test the thalamic
individual-level predictions of subjective effects. These analyses gating hypothesis using spectral
DCM. Their chosen network
revealed that changes in FC and EC between several regions consisted of the thalamus, ventral
striatum (VS), posterior
including angular gyrus and inferior frontal gyrus as well as cingulate cortex (pCC), and temporal
cortex. The authors reported
connections between occipital and cerebellar regions correlated stronger 5-HT2A-receptor-dependent
thalamus → pCC connectiv-
with global subjective effects of LSD and classiﬁers trained on ity and weaker 5-HT2A-receptor-
independent VS → thalamus con-
either FC or EC could discriminate between LSD and placebo with nectivity under LSD. In line with
their results, we also found
high accuracy of 86% and 91%, respectively. stronger thalamus → pCC connectivity under LSD, while
weaker
VS → thalamus connectivity was not reproduced in our study. In
Face validity of whole-brain effective connectivity our data, the right accumbens → right thalamus
connection was
To assess the face validity of EC measures, we compared thalamic stronger under LSD. However, weaker
VS → thalamus was
connections and found that the effects (sign and signiﬁcance) independent of 5-HT2A-receptor
antagonist Ketanserin adminis-
were consistent across FC and EC, although a recent study argued tration in [20], while stronger
thalamus → pCC connectivity was
that this does not necessarily need to be the case [16]. Indeed, observed when the 5-HT2A was not
blocked—perhaps pointing to
changes in thalamic connectivity across conditions were also in differing mechanisms of action.
perfect agreement with those of a previous FC analysis based on a
subset of participants [14]. Together with the highly accurate Implications for the thalamic gating
hypothesis and brain
classiﬁcation performance, these ﬁndings reassured us that EC entropy accounts
estimates appeared to show face validity, i.e. EC estimates were Our results are in line with the
thalamic gating hypothesis, which
consistent with previous results and affected by LSD. postulates that psychedelics may temporally
reduce thalamic

Neuropsychopharmacology
P. Bedford et al.
gating leading to excessive information ﬂow from thalamus to exclude that participants fell asleep
during placebo scans. Further
cortical regions [36]. As previous analyses investigating FC [10, 14] limitations are the single
post-drug scan design and the small
and EC [20] changes under LSD, we found stronger connectivity sample size.
from thalamus to a widespread network of cortical regions Fig. 3. Moreover, LSD is known to affect
heart rate, blood pressure and
Interestingly, connectivity from cortex to thalamus was also body temperature [52, 53]. Here, we
controlled for physiological
stronger under LSD, which possibly suggests the presence of effects using baseline measures.
Nonetheless, these effects are
positive feedback loops between thalamus and cortex. likely still impacting connectivity estimates
and may partially
Brain entropy accounts of psychedelics propose that altered account for the effects. Future studies
should include concurrent
states of consciousness observed following administration of physiological measurements during MRI
acquisition to allow for
psychedelics result from increased entropy in the brain [37–39]. more detailed physiological noise
modelling (e.g., see [54]).
Even though testing these accounts was not the goal of this study, Due to the salient subjective
effects of LSD, blinding is
we note that overall our results are in agreement with this inherently difﬁcult. Thus, knowledge
about the condition could
proposal. Speciﬁcally, we found changes in self-connections or have impacted neural effects and
future studies should include
within-region dynamics suggesting widespread disinhibition active control conditions. Although do
note that one of the studies
across most of the cortex. From a dynamic system perspective, included an active control [30],
rendering it less likely that
this disinhibtion renders the system more unstable since it participants correctly identiﬁed the
condition in part of the data. A
approaches a critical point as self-connection values approach limitation of the behavioural PLSC
analysis is that subjective
zero. However, it is worth noting that we found the opposite effects were rated retrospectively and
not restricted to the time
pattern in occipital regions, where local inhibition increased under window of the fMRI
measurements.
LSD rendering dynamics in these areas more stable. While our Finally, while classiﬁcation
performances in this study were
results are generally in line with the proposal that psychedelics promising, they should be taken as
preliminary until replicated in
like LSD increase brain entropy (on average), this whole-brain an external sample.
analysis revealed that a more ﬁne-grained assessment of entropy
across different regions may be warranted in future studies to Future directions
reﬁne these accounts. Our results suggest that local gain is changed under LSD
It is interesting to note that connections between occipital implicating disturbances of the E/I
balance as a neural mechanism
regions appear to dominate EC under placebo (Fig. 1F), whereas underlying LSD effects. Because rDCM
summarises region-speciﬁc
the difference between visual and other regions is reduced under E/I balance by a single parameter
per region, we cannot determine
LSD (Fig. 1E). This result aligns with a recent study [40], which whether excitation, inhibition, or
both are impacted. Future studies
showed that the principal gradient of cortical connectivity ﬂattens should employ more detailed
models that allow to pinpoint these
under LSD. Our results support the authors’ interpretation of a changes and compare them empirically
to other conditions in
decrease in functional differentiation between sensory and which the E/I balance is affected, for
example psychosis [49, 50].
abstract cognitive processing under LSD. Furthermore, our results suggest that visual regions may be
impacted quite differently both in terms of between-region
Does LSD perturb the excitation/inhibition (E/I) balance? connectivity as well as in terms of local
gain compared to the
Recent studies have begun to investigate the impact of rest of the cortex warranting further
investigation. The physiolo-
psychedelics on glutamate-mediated excitation of the cortex. At gical basis of these changes and the
relationship with subjective
least two different pathways for glutamatergic effects have been effects—visual hallucinations in
particular—should be examined
proposed: (1) Agonism at 5-HT2A receptors on pyramidal cells may in future studies. A comparison of
eyes-open vs eyes-closed
lead to increased glutamate release [41, 42] and (2) agonism at resting states would be valuable to
determine whether the EC
postsynaptic, inhibitory 5-HT1A receptors may result in reduced changes observed here are a
reﬂection of eyes-open-like
excitation in certain regions, for example in hippocampus [43, 44]. behaviour of the visual system.
While we cannot directly speak to these pathways, widespread Finally, we found that both whole-brain
FC and EC were equally
increases in self-connections or local disinhibition as identiﬁed in capable of discriminating
between LSD and placebo with high
this study may relate to 5-HT2A-mediated glutamate release. accuracy suggesting that both are
promising candidates for more
Conversely, increased inhibition could be mediated via the 5-HT1A challenging prediction targets.
More research is needed to assess
pathway, although this receptor is not strongly expressed in whether machine learning models trained
on either FC and EC
occipital regions [45]. Rather, 5-HT1B expression is increased in estimates are able to predict
subjective effects of LSD at an
these regions [45] and may be a candidate mechanism requiring individual level or from baseline EC
measured before LSD intake.
further investigation.
Our results along with preclinical studies [42, 46, 47] and recent Conclusions
magnetic resonance spectroscopy results [44] suggest that LSD To the best of our knowledge, this is
the ﬁrst study to examine the
may perturb the E/I balance of the brain. This is especially relevant impact of LSD on whole-brain
EC. We found that compared to
because disturbances in the E/I balance have been discussed in placebo, LSD impacted local gain and
was associated with
the context of psychosis [48, 49] and more recently in the context primarily stronger FC and EC with
the notable exception of
of psychedelic-induced hallucinations and synaesthesia [50]. connections involving occipital and
subcortical regions. Moreover,
Comparing LSD-induced changes in E/I balance to other EC correlated with global subjective effects
and discriminated
psychedelics and those associated with clinical psychosis will be experimental conditions with high
accuracy (91.11%) highlighting
an interesting avenue for future research. that EC preserved classiﬁcation accuracy while providing
addi-
tional mechanistic information pointing towards LSD-induced
Limitations disturbances of the E/I balance. This result suggests that EC is a
A few limitations of this study merit attention. Despite a washout promising candidate biomarker to
decode or predict subjective
period of at least two weeks, we cannot fully exclude carry-over effects of LSD in the future.
effects due to potential long-term effects of psychedelics [51]. An
additional limitation in this context is the variable time between
placebo and LSD sessions, which was owed to constraints in REFERENCES
scheduling participants, since the study required participants to 1. Rucker JJ, Iliff J, Nutt DJ.
Psychiatry & the psychedelic drugs. past, present &
spend 24h under supervision on each study day. We also cannot future. Neuropharmacology.
2018;142:200–18.

Neuropsychopharmacology
P. Bedford et al.
2. Krebs TS, Johansen P-Ø. Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) for alcoholism: 32. Studerus E, Gamma A,
Vollenweider FX. Psychometric evaluation of the altered
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. J Psychopharmacol. states of consciousness rating
scale (OAV). PloS One. 2010;5:e12412.
2012;26:994–1002. 33. Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y. Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and
3. Bogenschutz MP, et al. Percentage of heavy drinking days following powerful approach to multiple
testing. J R Stat Soc, Ser B (Method).
psilocybin-assisted psychotherapy vs placebo in the treatment of adult patients 1995;57:289–300.
with alcohol use disorder: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Psychiatry. 34. Krishnan A, Williams
LJ, McIntosh AR, Abdi H. Partial Least Squares (PLS) methods
2022;79:953–62. for neuroimaging: a tutorial and review. NeuroImage. 2011;56:455–75.
4. Goodwin GM, et al. Single-dose psilocybin for a treatment-resistant episode of 35. Breiman L.
Random forests. Mach Learn. 2001;45:5–32.
major depression. N Engl J Med. 2022;387:1637–48. 36. Vollenweider FX, Geyer MA. A systems model of
altered consciousness:
5. Holze F, Gasser P, Müller F, Dolder PC, Liechti ME. Lysergic acid diethylamide- integrating
natural and drug-induced psychoses. Brain Research Bulletin.
assisted therapy in patients with anxiety with and without a life-threatening 2001;56:495–507.
illness a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled Phase II study. Biol Psy- 37. Carhart-Harris
R. L. et al. The entropic brain: a theory of conscious states
chiatry. 2022;95:215–23. informed by neuroimaging research with psychedelic drugs. Front Hum
Neurosci.
6. Grifﬁths RR, et al. Psilocybin produces substantial and sustained decreases in 2014;8.
depression and anxiety in patients with life-threatening cancer: a randomized 38. Carhart-Harris RL.
The entropic brain-revisited. Neuropharmacology. 2018;142:167–78.
double-blind trial. J Psychopharmacol. 2016;30:1181–97. 39. Carhart-Harris RL, Friston KJ. Rebus and
the anarchic brain: toward a uniﬁed
7. Ross S, et al. Rapid and sustained symptom reduction following psilocybin model of the brain
action of psychedelics. Pharmacol Rev. 2019;71:316–44.
treatment for anxiety and depression in patients with life-threatening cancer: a 40. Girn M. et al.
Serotonergic psychedelic drugs LSD and psilocybin reduce the
randomized controlled trial. J Psychopharmacol. 2016;30:1165–80. hierarchical differentiation of
unimodal and transmodal cortex. NeuroImage.
8. Gasser P, Kirchner K, Passie T. LSD-assisted psychotherapy for anxiety associated
2022;256:119220.
with a life-threatening disease: a qualitative study of acute and sustained sub- 41. Nichols DE.
Psychedelics. Pharmacol Rev. 2016;68:264–355.
jective effects. J Psychopharmacol. 2015;29:57–68. 42. Aghajanian GK, Marek GJ. Serotonin, via
5-HT2A receptors, increases EPSCs in
9. Nutt D, Carhart-Harris R. The current status of psychedelics in psychiatry. JAMA layer V
pyramidal cells of prefrontal cortex by an asynchronous mode of gluta-
Psychiatry. 2021;78:121–2. mate release. Brain Res. 1999;825:161–71.
10. Tagliazucchi E, et al. Increased global functional connectivity correlates with LSD- 43. Lewis
CR, et al. Two dose investigation of the 5-HT-agonist psilocybin on relative
induced ego dissolution. Curr Biol. 2016;26:1043–50. and global cerebral blood ﬂow. NeuroImage.
2017;159:70–8.
11. Roseman L, et al. LSD alters eyes-closed functional connectivity within the early 44. Mason N,
et al. Me, myself, bye: regional alterations in glutamate and the
visual cortex in a retinotopic fashion. Hum Brain Mapp. 2016;37:3031–40. experience of ego
dissolution with psilocybin. Neuropsychopharmacology.
12. Kaelen M, et al. LSD modulates music-induced imagery via changes in para- 2020;45:2003–11.
hippocampal connectivity. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol: J Eur Coll Neuropsycho- 45. Beliveau V, et al. A
high-resolution in vivo atlas of the human brain’s serotonin
pharmacol. 2016;26:1099–109. system. J Neurosci. 2017;37:120–8.
13. Carhart-Harris RL, et al. Neural correlates of the LSD experience revealed by 46. Scruggs JL,
Patel S, Bubser M, Deutch AY. DOI-induced activation of the cortex:
multimodal neuroimaging. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2016;113:4853–8. dependence on 5-HT2A heteroceptors
on thalamocortical glutamatergic neu-
14. Müller F, et al. Increased thalamic resting-state connectivity as a core driver of rons. J
Neurosci. 2000;20:8846–52.
LSD-induced hallucinations. Acta Psychiatr Scand. 2017;136:648–57. 47. Scruggs JL, Schmidt D, Deutch
AY. The hallucinogen 1-[2, 5-dimethoxy-4-iodo-
15. Preller K. et al. Changes in global and thalamic brain connectivity in LSD-induced
phenyl]-2-aminopropane (DOI) increases cortical extracellular glutamate levels in
altered states of consciousness are attributable to the 5-HT2A receptor. eLife. rats. Neurosci Lett.
2003;346:137–40.
2018;7:e35082. 48. Jardri R, Deneve S. Circular inferences in schizophrenia. Brain.
2013;136:3227–41.
16. Barnett L., Muthukumaraswamy S. D., Carhart-Harris R. L. & Seth A. K. 49. Jardri R, Duverne S,
Litvinova AS, Denève S. Experimental evidence for circular
Decreased directed functional connectivity in the psychedelic state. NeuroImage. inference in
schizophrenia. Nat Commun. 2017;8:1–13.
2020;209. 50. Leptourgos P., Bouttier V., Denève S. & Jardri R. From hallucinations to synaes-
17. Bershad AK, et al. Preliminary report on the effects of a low dose of LSD on thesia: a circular
inference account of unimodal and multimodal erroneous
resting-state amygdala functional connectivity. Cognitive Neurosci Neuroima- percepts in clinical
and drug-induced psychosis. Neurosci Biobehav Rev.
ging. 2020;5:461–7. 2022;104593.
18. Luppi A. I. et al. LSD alters dynamic integration and segregation in the human 51. McCulloch
DE-W, et al. Psychedelic resting-state neuroimaging: a review and
brain. NeuroImage. 2021;227:17653. perspective on balancing replication and novel analyses. Neurosci
Biobehav Rev.
19. Timmermann C, et al. LSD modulates effective connectivity and neural adapta- 2022;138:104689.
tion mechanisms in an auditory oddball paradigm. Neuropharmacology. 52. Schmid Y, et al. Acute
effects of lysergic acid diethylamide in healthy subjects.
2018;142:251–62. Biol Psychiatry. 2015;78:544–53.
20. Preller K, et al. Effective connectivity changes in LSD-induced altered states of 53. Dolder PC,
Liechti ME, Rentsch KM. Development and validation of an LC-MS/MS
consciousness in humans. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2019;116:2743–8. method to quantify lysergic acid
diethylamide (LSD), iso-LSD, 2-oxo-3-hydroxy-
21. Felleman DJ, Van Essen DC. Distributed hierarchical processing in the primate LSD, and nor-LSD
and identify novel metabolites in plasma samples in a con-
cerebral cortex. Cerebral Cortex. 1991;1:1–47. trolled clinical trial. J Clin Lab Aanal.
2018;32:e22265.
22. Markov NT, et al. A weighted and directed interareal connectivity matrix for 54. Kasper L, et
al. The PhysIO toolbox for modeling physiological noise in fMRI data.
macaque cerebral cortex. Cerebral Cortex. 2014;24:17–36. J Neurosci Methods. 2017;276:56–72.
23. Friston K. Functional and effective connectivity in neuroimaging: a synthesis. 55. McIntosh A,
Lobaugh N. Partial least squares analysis of neuroimaging data:
Hum Brain Mapp. 1994;2:56–78. applications and advances. NeuroImage. 2004;23:S250–63.
24. Frässle S, et al. Regression DCM for fMRI. NeuroImage. 2017;155:406–21. 56. Mišić B, et al.
Network-level structure-function relationships in human neocortex.
25. Friston KJ, Harrison L, Penny W. Dynamic causal modelling. NeuroImage. Cerebral Cortex.
2016;26:3285–96.
2003;19:1273–302. 57. Efron B. & Tibshirani R. Bootstrap methods for standard errors, conﬁdence
26. Frässle S. et al. A generative model of whole-brain effective connectivity. Neu- intervals, and
other measures of statistical accuracy. Stat Sci. 1986;1:54–75.
roImage. 2018;179:505–29.
27. Frässle S, et al. Regression dynamic causal modeling for resting-state fMRI.
Human Brain Mapping. 2021;42:2159–80.
28. Dolder PC, Schmid Y, Müller F, Borgwardt S, Liechti ME. LSD acutely impairs fear
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
recognition and enhances emotional empathy and sociality. Neuropsycho-
FM had full access to all of the data in the study and takes responsibility for the
pharmacology. 2016;41:2638–46.
integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis. All authors contributed
29. Müller F, Dolder PC, Schmidt A, Liechti ME, Borgwardt S. Altered network hub
substantially to this work as outlined below: Concept and design: SB, DJH, MEL,
connectivity after acute LSD administration. NeuroImage Clinical.
FM. Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data: All authors. Drafting of the
2018;18:694–701.
manuscript: PB, DJH. Critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual
30. Holze F, et al. Distinct acute effects of LSD, MDMA and D-amphetamine in healthy
content: All authors. Obtained funding for the original studies: SB, MEL.
subjects. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2020;45:462–71.
Administrative, technical, or material support: SB, AOD, MEL, FM, VR, ZW.
31. Dittrich A. The standardized psychometric assessment of altered states of con-
Supervision: SB, AOD, MEL, FM, VR.
sciousness (ASCs) in humans. Pharmacopsychiatry. 1998;31:80–4.

Neuropsychopharmacology
P. Bedford et al.
FUNDING Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/
We are grateful for support from the Swiss National Science Foundation (trial A: SNF reprints
project grant, 320030_1449493 to MEL, trial B: SNF project grant, 320030_170249 to
SB and MEL, Doc.Mobility, P1BSP3_200054 to DJH, Ambizione, PZ00P3_167952 to Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
AOD) and the Krembil Foundation (to AOD). in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.

COMPETING INTERESTS
ML is a consultant for Mind Medicine, Inc. The other authors report no ﬁnancial
interests or potential conﬂicts of interest. Knowhow and data associated with this Open Access This
article is licensed under a Creative Commons
work and owned by the University Hospital Basel were licensed by Mind Medicine, Attribution 4.0
International License, which permits use, sharing,
Inc. Mind Medicine, Inc., had no role in ﬁnancing, planning, or conducting the present adaptation,
distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
study or the present publication. While Mindmed, Inc., has a collaboration with the appropriate
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
University Hospital including a licence for using clinical data exclusively for Commons license, and
indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
medication development and regulatory purposes, none of the present data or material in this article
are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
other fMRI data has been shared with Mindmed, Inc. indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41386-023-01574-8.
© The Author(s) 2023
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Daniel J. Hauke.

Neuropsychopharmacology
